e
XI JINPING
 
China’s Third New Era
 
As its title ‘Xi Jinping: China’s Third New Era’ suggests, the book covers the period midJune 2017 till the end of 2020—a period when, Xi Jinping’s acolytes claim, China had 
already embarked on a third thirty-year era under his leadership, like those of Mao 
and Deng before him. 
This period also saw an outpouring of criticism against the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP) and the Chinese President not witnessed since the Tiananmen Square 
events in 1989. The resentment was sparked by Xi Jinping abolishing tenure limits that 
govern the cadres’ terms in office as well as the mishandling of the initial stages of the 
Covid pandemic. It is also the period when Xi Jinping began using the country’s security 
apparatus to further consolidate his position and impose progressively restrictive 
controls on society. He followed through on his slogan: “party, government, military, 
civilian and academic; east, west, south, north and centre, the Party leads everything”! 
The essays explore the modernisation of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA); Xi 
Jinping tightening his grip on members of the Politburo and the higher echelons of the 
Party; China’s policy on Tibet and Beijing’s efforts to negate the Dalai Lama’s influence 
inside China as well as abroad. 
China’s attitude and posture towards India, which have undergone definite change 
since Xi Jinping adopted an aggressive foreign policy to achieve the “rejuvenation of 
the Chinese nation”, have been covered at length. This includes the ongoing incursions 
along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in Ladakh since May 2020. 
Jayadeva Ranade, is President of the ‘Centre for China Analysis and Strategy’. He 
retired as Additional Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, Government of India in August 
2008 and is a former Member of the National Security Advisory Board (NSAB). He has 
over 45 years xperience analysing developments relating to China, Tibet and East 
Asia. His foreign assignments include Hong Kong, Beijing and Washington DC. 
He has authored China Unveiled: Insights into Chinese Strategic Thinking, 
Xi Jinping’s China and Cadres of Tibet. 

KNOWLEDGE WORLD 
KW Publishers Pvt Ltd
	
New Delhi
	
XI JINPING
 
China’s Third New Era
 
JAYADEVA RANADE
 
First published 2023
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 Jayadeva Ranade and KW Publishers
The right of Jayadeva Ranade to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks,
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Print edition not for sale in South Asia (India, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan or
Bhutan)
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 9781032393988 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032393995 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003349549 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003349549
Typeset in A Caslon Pro
by KW Publishers, Delhi
Preface	 ix

1
 
7
 
5
 
1.	 Xi Jinping Prepares to Lead China into New Thirty-Year Era 
2.	 China’s Internal Situation before the 19th Party Congress:
 
An Overview 
3.	 China’s Internal Situation: Is Xi Jinping under Pressure 1
4.	 The China Dream 21
 
5.	 China: Path to Hi-Technology 28
 
6.	 China’s Maritime Challenge in the Indo-Pacific 43
 
7.	 Belt and Road Initiative and its Future Implications 48
 
8.	 China’s 19th Party Congress: New Leaders 

to Steer China to the China Dream 53
 
9.	 Initial Assessment of Xi Jinping’s Work Report at 

19th Party Congress 56
 
10.	 Analysis of China’s 19th Party Congress 67
 
11.	 Distancing the PLA From Politics: Representatives 

in CCP Standing Committees 74
 
12.	 Initial Assessment of China’s CPPCC Plenary Session, 2019 79
 
13.	 A Brief Assessment of China’s 3rd Session of the 
13th CPPCC, May 2020 84 
14.	 An Assessment of the Second Plenum of China’s 13th National 

People’s Congress 90
 
15.	 An Assessment of the 13th Session of China’s 13th 
NPC, May 2020 101 
16.	 China’s Military and the National People’s Congress 114
 
17.	 No Change in Chinese President Xi Jinping’s Assertive Policies 

Despite Pressure 123
 
18.	 CCP CC’s 4th Plenum Could Suggest a Dilution in 

Xi Jinping’s Authority 127
 
Contents
 
– V – 
 
 
19.	 Chinese President Xi Jinping Faces Difficult Times Ahead 132
 
20.	 Popular Protests Undermine Chinese President

Xi Jinping’s Credibility 137
 
21.	 The COVID-19 Epidemic and China’s Economy 143
 
22.	 China’s Economic Revival will Face Serious Headwinds 153
 
23.	 Dissatisfaction with Chinese President Xi Jinping Mounts 160
 
24.	 Chinese President Xi Jinping Reacts to Inner Party Opposition 167
 
25.	 Xi Jinping Shores up Position to Fend off Opponents 171
 
26.	 Qiu Shi Calls for Protecting Xi Jinping as “Core” of the

Whole Chinese Communist Party 178
 
27.	 Xi Jinping Launches ‘Yan’an Style’ Campaign to Cleanse China’s

Security Apparatus 183
 
28.	 Xi Jinping’s Efforts to Consolidate Marxist Ideology among CCP

Members to Counter US 188
 
29.	 China and the Post COVID-19 World 194
 
30.	 The US-China Trade War: A Strategic Move 200
 
31.	 The US-China Trade War: Fall-Out in China 207
 
32.	 China’s View of Ties with the US: Hints of Concessions? 212
 
33.	 China’s ‘Big Two’ have Domestic Discontent and US-China Tension

as Backdrop: India Finds Mention in US-China Exchange 219
 
34.	 Chinese Researchers Suggest Modulation of China’s Policy

Towards United States 226
 
35.	 Tension is High Within China’s Leadership Echelons as

United States Maintains Unrelenting Pressure 230
 
36.	 Chinese Assessments of the International Situation 236
 
37.	 CICIR’s Assessment of China’s Major Country Diplomacy 242
 
38.	 China Debates Policy Towards US as Biden’s Administration
 
Takes Over 246
 
39.	 China: Conference on Peripheral Diplomacy 254
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
– VI – 
 
 
40.	 Xi Jinping Launches Campaigns to Entrench the 

Chinese Communist Party Among the People 260
 
41.	 China’s 19th Party Congress Indicates No Change in 

China’s Policy Towards Tibet 265
 
42.	 Tibet has been Receiving Higher Priority in Recent Months 269
 
43.	 China Intensifies Efforts to Diminish Dalai Lama’s Influence 274
 
44.	 Tibet Autonomous Region’s Expenditure 

on Public Security 279
 
45.	 China’s Xiaokang (Well-Off ) Border Defence Villages 

in Tibet Autonomous Region 285
 
46.	 China and US Could Emerge as Adversaries 

over the Tibet Issue 291
 
47.	 China’s Seventh Tibet Work Forum, August 29-30, 2020 295
 
48.	 China’s Third Central Xinjiang Work Conference 303
 
49.	 Inner-Party Differences on Hong Kong Issue Pose Problems 

for Xi Jinping 308
 
50.	 DPP’s Win in Taiwan Elections will have Repercussions 314
 
51.	 CPEC and Challenges for Pakistan 318
 
52.	 Brief Analysis of Chinese Propaganda During India-China 

Face-Off at Doklam, June 16-August 1, 2017 332
 
53.	 Different Facets of the Doklam Face-Off: An Overview 340
 
54.	 Composition and Implications of Chinese Defence Minister 

Wei Fenghe’s Visit to India 351
 
55.	 Chinese State Councillor and Public Security Minister 

Zhao Kezhi’s Visit Yields Little Tangible Results 355
 
56.	 Can the Second Xi-Modi Summit Tackle the Really

Difficult Issues 359
 
57.	 Implications of the Ongoing Tension with China Along the LAC 364
 
58.	 China Probably has a Larger Hidden Agenda 369
 
59.	 Chinese Thinking on the India-China Border Issue 373
 
– VII – 
CONTENTS 
60.	 China Appears to have Initiated a Phase of

Deception along the LAC 381
 
61.	 Chinese Publication Asserts Aksai Chin is
 
“Illegally Occupied by India” 385
 
62.	 An Authoritative Chinese Assessment of how China Views India 388
 
Index	 395
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
– VIII – 
 Preface
 
Observing China is an interesting, albeit arcane, pursuit. Reading Chinese 
tea leaves has always been difficult, but since Xi Jinping came to power and 
stricter and more restrictive controls have been placed on media and society, it 
has become even more so. This book seeks to pierce through this opacity in an 
attempt to decipher China’s internal developments, its foreign policy agenda 
and, of course, its attitude and policy towards India.
Since 2013, changes in China have been fast-paced and definitive,
reflecting Xi Jinping’s character and growing self-confidence. From the time 
of Mao Zedong, no Chinese leader has consolidated more power into his own 
hands than Xi, who has assumed the chairmanship of at least nineteen Central 
Small Leading Groups—the most powerful bodies in China. Xi now exercises 
control over a broad sweep of subjects, ranging from the modernization and 
control of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), the direction of economic 
reform, the shaping of foreign policy and security affairs, as well as the 
leadership of Chinese Communist Party (CCP)’s United Front—its arm for 
liaising, influencing and winning over political parties and individuals the 
world over, in addition to China’s ethnic minorities. It is no surprise, then,
that Xi is often referred to as the ‘Chairman of Everything’! 
The briefs selected for this book cover the period from mid-June 2017 
till the end of 2020, an important phase in China’s contemporary history.
It marks China’s reversion to communist orthodoxy, but one overlaid with 
the soft overtones of cosmetic window dressing to distinguish it from the 
harsh decade of the Cultural Revolution. The period has been marked by
Xi consistently fanning nationalist sentiment and ensuring that the CCP’s 
ideology and control permeates all sections of State and society. Furthermore,
in an attempt to consolidate his grip on power and fortify his position, Xi 
has strengthened China’s security apparatus thus preparing the way for his 
indefinite continuance at the helm of China’s affairs. Incidentally, Xi’s acolytes 
had observed as early as 2013, that ‘China under Xi Jinping has embarked on 
a third new, thirty-year era like that of Mao and Deng before him’! 
– IX –
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
At the same time, the resentment simmering at all levels of Chinese society
has become noticeable. In 2017-18 and again between late 2019 and mid-2020, 
there was an outpouring of criticism levelled personally against the CCP and
its “leader”, Xi Jinping—an outburst not witnessed since the Tiananmen Square
incident in 1989. This resentment was first sparked by Xi’s decision to abolish 
the informal term limits that denied cadres more than two terms in office and 
governed their elevation to senior positions. Resentment was rekindled after the
perceived mishandling of the initial stages of the Covid pandemic. Nonetheless,
Xi Jinping appears for now to have successfully suppressed dissent by imposing
progressively tougher security controls and punitive measures.
The book examines these and other important issues that have far 
reaching consequences for China’s neighbours.The deterioration of China-US 
relations—regarded by Chinese as the most crucial of China’s relationships 
and which many senior CCP cadres and Chinese analysts privately say has 
been mishandled by Xi Jinping -- has been dealt with in detail. It looks at 
Sino-Pakistan relations, the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) and 
the recent developments in Tibet. Xi’s aggressive goal of “rejuvenation of the 
great Chinese nation” —code for “recovering” territories that China lays claim 
to—as well as his uncompromising stance on foreign policy has left China’s
neighbours wary. India is directly affected.
Special attention has been paid to India-China relations since China’s 
attitude towards India has altered significantly since Xi came to power. The 
new hostile posture became particularly evident during the 73-day face-off
at Doklam in 2017, followed by the ongoing Chinese incursions in Ladakh 
and massing of troops along the entire Line of Actual Control (LAC) since 
May 2020—an act of aggression that was anticipated by this author as early
as 2016. The writing on the wall is clear. With trust having been demolished,
India-China relations will for many years be marked by wariness and suspicion.
There is a high probability of armed clashes in the coming decade.
A fair amount of detail has been provided in the book so that it interests 
not only the general reader, but also the more serious China watchers.
Footnotes and references have deliberately been omitted to avoid distracting 
the reader, but the sources for the data are incorporated in the text where 
considered necessary. 
– X – 
PREFACE 
I hope the book succeeds in providing some clarity and useful insights 
into China’s internal developments, its leadership’s thinking and foreign and 
strategic policies. Each of these have a direct impact on India and, with an 
aggressive ‘rising’ China, are becoming increasingly important for the world at 
large. The period till 2030 is crucial. 
New Delhi Jayadeva Ranade 
October 2021 
– XI – 

1. Xi Jinping Prepares to Lead China into 
New Thirty-Year Era 
Last week there was a major, though anticipated, development in China’s
internal politics with the announcement that term limits on the posts of
China’s President and Vice President would be abolished. Removing the 
limitation on these tenures establishes Xi Jinping’s preeminent stature and 
allows him to continue interminably, subject to his health. It removes the 
possibility of any perceived depletion of authority in case he is compelled to 
step down as President on the completion of two terms in 2023. In reality,
Xi Jinping and the ‘princelings’ or ‘Red Descendants’ have effected a coup to 
achieve the dreams of their forebears and restore China to what they perceive 
is its former greatness.The decision potentially has immense implications and 
long-term repercussions.
On February 25, 2018, the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) Central
Committee (CC) convened a special plenary session to recommend an 
amendment to the Constitution of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). A 
4,457-character communiqué issued after the plenum proposed abolition of 
the two-term—10-year—limit on the tenures of China’s President and Vice 
President. The amendments will be incorporated into the PRC’s Constitution 
when the 2,980 newly elected Deputies of the National People’s Congress 
(NPC)—China’s version of a Parliament—meet in Beijing for its first session 
on March 5, 2018. 
This will be the first amendment to China’s Constitution in 14 years.
Another ten amendments of varying importance will also be deliberated upon, 
with at least two further adding to Xi Jinping’s authority. One will establish 
the State Supervisory Commission, a body that will exercise authority over 
even the Party’s powerful Central Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC).
Another amendment to the Constitution, but unlike others, significantly 
asserts, “CCP leadership is the most substantive feature of socialism with 
Chinese characteristics”. The amendment amplifies the thrust of Xi Jinping’s 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
report to the 19th Party Congress—that the Party will pervade every sphere of 
endeavour of the state—and, in doing so, effectively dispenses with the, albeit 
cosmetic superficial, separation of the Party and state that Deng Xiaoping 
sought to usher in.
The time limit on the tenures of China’s President and Vice President was 
brought in by Deng Xiaoping in 1982, who was determined to guard against
the reemergence of a personality cult like that of Mao Zedong. Deng Xiaoping
was also keen that there be no repetition of the one-man authoritarian rule 
that China witnessed during Mao’s almost 30-year regime and during which
many Party cadres and members had suffered. Many senior cadres, including
Deng Xiaoping and Xi Jinping’s father, Xi Zhongxun, had personally suffered 
and been purged for questioning Mao’s judgement or because Mao felt they 
were not complying with his instructions. By discarding these provisions, Xi 
Jinping has effectively closed the door on Deng Xiaoping’s era.
Xi Jinping, who has used nationalism and ideology to promote political
stability and ensure the Party’s monopoly on power, began to quickly concentrate
greater power soon after his appointment to China’s three top posts of CCP
CC General Secretary, Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC)
and President of China. By September 2017, Xi Jinping was overseeing crucial
aspects of the state and exercised direct control over the security apparatus,
military, cyber security and the economy. He holds fifteen formal positions, more
than any CCP leader, including Mao Zedong or Deng Xiaoping! He has taken
care to simultaneously build his credentials as a Chinese Communist ideologue,
and in June 2014, the CCP’s theoretical fortnightly journal Qiu Shi (Seeking
Truth) described Xi Jinping as “one of China’s greatest Communist leaders”.
The 19th Party Congress incorporated “Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with
Chinese Characteristics in the New Era” into the Party Constitution and, after
the first Politburo meeting a couple of days later, the term lingxiu (respected
leader) is being used for Xi Jinping. The term lingxiu was last used for Mao. Xi 
Jinping has used the media effectively too and is regularly the lead news item 
in the People’s Daily and China Central Television (CCTV). In contrast to his
predecessors Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao, who received media coverage 3,000
and 2,000 times a year respectively, there are more than 5,000 news items on Xi
Jinping each year! 
– 2 – 
XI JINPING PREPARES TO LEAD CHINA INTO NEW THIRTY-YEAR ERA 
Quite aside from the symbolic value of the amendment, it is interesting
that the post of China’s President is the least important of Xi Jinping’s three 
posts and that of the PRC Vice President even less so, with neither exercising
any substantive power. Real power vests in the post of General Secretary of the
CCP CC, which has no formal fixed tenure. Since the 17th Party Congress 
in 2007, however, the CCP has observed an informal rule that no individual 
shall hold the post of CCP CC General Secretary for more than two terms of 
five years each. The next most important post in China, that of Chairman of 
the Central Military Commission (CMC) also has no such limitation. In fact,
since 1987, the Chairman of the CMC need not be the CCP CC General 
Secretary or a member of the Politburo or even a member of the CC. Jiang
Zemin, for instance, continued as Chairman of the CMC for one and a half 
years after Hu Jintao had taken over as CCP CC General Secretary.
On the surface, Xi Jinping’s move to abolish limits on the terms of China’s 
President and Vice President does not appear to materially affect him except
that he would have to give up the post of President in case he continues beyond 
his second term. Speculation is rife in Beijing that the amendment paves the 
way for the appointment of Wang Qishan, till recently Politburo Standing
Committee (PBSC) member and Xi Jinping’s trusted friend and lieutenant, 
as Vice President of China. Wang Qishan could possibly concurrently be
appointed Chairman of the powerful State Supervisory Commission that
will be formally established by the upcoming NPC session, allowing him to
continue the work he began while chairing the Party’s CDIC, but from a more 
powerful vantage perch.This move nonetheless implies that the ‘informal’limit 
on the term for a General Secretary of the CCP CC can easily be dispensed
with. Similarly, observance of the ‘informal’rule that Party cadres aged 68 years 
or more are ineligible for entry to the Politburo (PB) or Politburo Standing
Committee (PBSC) is now at risk. The amendments could open the doors for
Xi Jinping for promoting his followers and loyalists to higher Party bodies 
as well retaining loyal cadres, like 67-year old PBSC member Li Zhanshu 
and 66-year old Harvard-trained economist Liu He, in the PB and PBSC,
regardless of age.
While quite predictably the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) expressed 
“resolute support” to the amendments on February 27, there are hints of 
– 3 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
opposition to the lifting of limits on the terms of the President and Vice 
President. 
The sequence of meetings to deliberate upon, and approve, the decision 
is an indication. On January 18-19, 2018, the 2nd Plenum Communiqué
announced a constitutional amendment along with a summary in the 
communiqué but did not mention the removal of term limits. According to
a Reuters report, there were differing views and no consensus at this plenum
attended by 204 CC members; the date inscribed at the bottom of the 
constitutional amendment draft published on February 26 is “signed” by the 
Central Committee on January 26—however, there is no record of a Central 
Committee Plenum on January 26 or of a Politburo meeting; a Politburo 
meeting was held on January 30; the NPC Standing Committee which met
on February 22-23, is said to have decided on the submission of proposals
to a full NPC; on February 24, there was a PB meeting and ‘study session’ 
on constitutional matters; on February 25, the text of the constitutional 
amendment (and an announcement on the term limit) dated January 26 and
signed “Central Committee” was published; and a 3rd CC Plenum was held 
on February 26-27.
There is an important indication of the nervousness in the central Party
leadership on this issue. A Reuters report that filtered out of Hong Kong
on February 28 stated that Xinhua has been blamed by the leadership for 
releasing a single message in English titled “CPC Proposes Change on
Chinese President’s term in Constitution” at 3:55 pm on February 25. The 
Chinese version was released two hours later with the full text from the CCP 
CC. No report for the term limits in Chinese was released. According to the 
report, this was considered to be severe political misconduct: the relevant 
editors were dismissed and the leader of Xinhua was required to write a selfcritical piece.
Public articulation of anger on February 25 flooded Wechat, Weibo 
and Sina—which together account for hundreds of millions of users—with 
criticism, satire and satirical cartoons of Xi Jinping. The same day, the Party’s 
Central Propaganda Department ordered the blocking of at least 28 words 
and phrases deemed critical of either Xi Jinping or the decision. Sixty Sixyear-old Li Datong, a former editor of the state-run China Youth Daily, issued 
– 4 – 
XI JINPING PREPARES TO LEAD CHINA INTO NEW THIRTY-YEAR ERA 
a statement addressed to Beijing’s 55 Deputies to the NPC on WeChat on 
February 25, asking them to oppose the bill. Asserting that “he is old and 
has nothing to fear”, Li Datong said lifting term limits would “sow the seeds 
of chaos and that if there are no term limits on a country’s highest leader,
then we are returning to an imperial regime. My generation has lived through
Mao. That era is over. How can we possibly go back to it?” Separately, Wang
Ying, a businesswoman who has advocated government reforms, on WeChat 
described the Communist Party’s proposal as “an outright betrayal” and 
“against the tides.” She said, “I know that you (the government) will dare to 
do anything and one ordinary person’s voice is certainly useless. But I am 
a Chinese citizen, and I don’t plan on leaving. This is my motherland too!”
The state-run Global Times, on February 25, indirectly acknowledged the
opposition when it said, “There has been a related statement in the Preamble 
to the Constitution, but this has been challenged by some who are supported 
and instigated by overseas forces. In this sense, stressing the CPC leadership
in the constitutional amendment proposal was essential.”
Of interest too is the appearance since November 2017 in commentaries 
in the PLA Daily and military media of new phraseology emphasising the
need to “protect” Xi Jinping as the core of the leadership. The phrases include:
“we must ... keep a close watch on our awareness and resolutely safeguard 
Chairman Xi’s core position in the Party Central Committee and the whole
Party”; “Chairman Xi as the core of the Party Central Committee, ... and the 
whole Army sincerely supports and resolutely safeguards it …”; “safeguarding
Chairman Xi’s position is at the core of the Party Central Committee”;
and “ensure that the whole Army is absolutely loyal, absolutely pure and 
absolutely reliable. It resolutely listens to the Chairman’s command, … and 
makes President Xi reassured.”This emphasis on ‘protecting’ and ‘safeguarding’
Xi Jinping’s position is new and worth noting. It coincides with a usually
informed but unconfirmed report of an attempt on Xi Jinping’s life towards 
the end of last year.
The amendments solidify Xi Jinping’s position as China’s preeminent 
leader and will have an impact on China’s domestic policies and relations 
with other countries. There will now be no restraints domestically on Xi 
Jinping pursuing his goals. However, having taken charge of economic policy, 
– 5 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Xi Jinping will be responsible for any slowdown in growth and the people’s
living standards not keeping pace with their aspirations. In the nearer term, 
China’s effort to establish sovereignty over the South China Sea and effect 
reunification with Taiwan will be redoubled. China will pursue Xi Jinping’s 
flagship projects of the ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ (BRI) and ‘China Dream’
—both incorporated in the Party Constitution—along with his ambition of
achieving the “rejuvenation of the great Chinese nation” with greater vigour.
There will be increased pressure on countries to acquiesce to the BRI. The 
timetable spelt out in Xi Jinping’s report to the 19th Congress, of making
China a strong developed nation having “pioneering global influence” by 2050,
will now acquire increased emphasis. China can be expected to adopt a tougher
stance and negotiate harder to realise the ‘China Dream’ by 2021. There is 
little prospect of any softening in China’s stance on issues of sovereignty and 
territory. It is anticipated that China will be even more assertive now that Xi 
Jinping is its sole leader. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on March 
1, 2018.) 
– 6 – 
2. China’s Internal Situation before the
 
19th Party Congress: An Overview
 
Especially since the 18th Party Congress in November 2012 and as China 
moves to convene the 19th Party Congress in November 2017, there has been 
a steady hardening of the Chinese state. Political stability and regime survival 
have been on top on the Party agenda, and to ensure this, Xi Jinping has 
introduced progressively restrictive domestic measures and promoted the rise 
in nationalism. 
The first sign of the toughening stance was the Party conferring on Xi Jinping
China’s three top positions of General Secretary of the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) Central Committee (CC), Chairman of the Central Military
Commission (CMC) and President of the People’s Republic of China (PRC),
simultaneously for the first time in thirty years! The other was the installation
in a now reduced 7-member Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) of stolid,
doctrinaire apparatchiks. The backdrop to this was the unprecedented domestic
political scrabbling for top positions by senior CCP cadres witnessed through
2011-12 when Politburo (PB) member Bo Xilai attempted to usurp the top
position. The failed bid by Wang Lijun, Bo Xilai’s chief of public security in the
Chongqing municipality—a position equivalent to a central Vice Minister—to
defect to the US, also severely jolted the Party’s top echelons as it revealed that 
the CCP ‘nomenklatura’ had been penetrated by the West.
The 18th Party Congress —a watershed in contemporary Chinese politics 
—consequently hammered out the unequivocal message of stability, assertive 
policies, Party supremacy and the ‘China Dream’. 
Xi Jinping has used nationalism and ideology to promote political stability
and regime survival. He has consolidated his position and today chairs thirteen
central leading groups overseeing all crucial aspects of the state, including direct
control over the security apparatus, military, cyber security and the economy.
Xi Jinping’s titles are: General Secretary of the Central Committee (CC) of
the CCP; Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC); President of 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
the People’s Republic of China (PRC); Leader of the Central Leading Group
for Foreign Affairs; Leader of the Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs; 
Head of the Central Leading Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms;
Chairman of the Central National Security Commission; Head of the Central
Leading Group for Internet Security and Informatisation; Leader of the
Central Leading Group for National Defence and Military Reform; Head of
the Central Leading Group for Financial and Economic Affairs; Commanderin-Chief of the Joint Battle Command of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA);
and since January 2017, Chairman of the Central Commission for Integrated
Military and Civilian Development. He now holds more formal positions than
any CCP leader including Mao Zedong or Deng Xiaoping!
Xi Jinping has paid special attention to the PLA. Among the main 
reasons are the rampant corruption in the PLA wherein ranks were purchased 
and officers operated ‘illegal’ businesses; the existence of lobbies owing loyalty 
to retired veteran leaders; ousted PB member Bo Xilai’s success in creating a
lobby in the PLA to support his personal ambitions; and persistent propaganda
by outside ‘foreign forces’ and ‘liberal’ elements inside China that the PLA is 
an Army of the state and not the Party.
Attention was buttressed by Xi Jinping’s conviction that the Soviet Union 
had actually “disarmed” the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU)
by designating the Soviet Army as a national Army. Within a day of being
appointed Chairman of the CMC, Xi Jinping moved to tighten the Party’s grip
on the PLA and discipline it. At an enlarged meeting of the CMC, he declared
that political reliability would be the key determining criterion for promotions.
At the 3rd Party Plenum convened in October 2013, Xi Jinping brought the
PLA within the ambit of the Party’s watchdog anti-corruption body, the Central
Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC), as part of his effort to discipline
the PLA and eliminate resistance to its restructuring and reform. CDIC
investigators soon uncovered instances of corruption in the PLA and the arrests 
of senior officers followed. Many PLA officers of and above the rank of Major
General/Rear Admiral committed suicide while under investigation to ensure
that their families received the benefits due. By September 2016, official reports
stated that 86 PLA officers of the rank of Major General or above had been
dismissed on charges of corruption. An additional 50 PLA officers of the rank of 
– 8 – 
 
CHINA’S INTERNAL SITUATION BEFORE THE 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
Major General or above were retired in January 2017. By the end of 2016, a total
of 4,300 PLA officers, or over 30 per cent of the PLA officer corps, were under 
investigation for corruption. In March 2017, the official news agency Xinhua
publicised that a total of 4,885 PLA officers had been ‘punished’ for graft. There
is a high degree of popular support inside China for Xi Jinping in his campaign
against corruption in the PLA. The campaign additionally allows Xi Jinping to
build a loyal band of at least 135 PLA officers whom he will promote to the
rank of Major General and above, strengthens the Party’s grip on the PLA, and
ensures that PLA officers unquestioningly obey Xi Jinping and the CCP.
Party control on the PLA was stressed again most recently on April 27,
2017, when Xi Jinping visited the Southern Theatre Command and asked the 
PLA to strengthen ideology and ensure that it “resolutely follows the command
of the CCP CC”. He pointedly asked officers to “eliminate the impact” of 
Guo Boxiong and Xu Caihou. Such references almost five years after Guo 
Boxiong and Xu Caihou were punished suggest that their influence and that
of their mentor, former CCP CC General Secretary Jiang Zemin, along with
effects of their corrupt practices continue to linger.The continuing existence of 
problems in the PLA were highlighted by a PLA Daily commentary in March 
2017, which asserted that “malpractice, including spreading political rumors,
reckless comments on the Party’s theories and policies, and participation of
illegal associations should all be prohibited and punished”! Nonetheless, Xi 
Jinping has been successfully pushing through the most extensive and farreaching reforms to streamline and restructure the PLA since its founding!
Within days of the Party Congress, Xi Jinping began tackling problems 
within the Party, including corruption, a lazy work-style and ostentation. He 
introduced the practice of obtaining feedback from the people and colleagues
to assess the potential of a cadre. Standards for admission to the Party were 
sought to be enhanced and Xi Jinping told Party cadres that the emphasis
should be on better quality and not on increasing numbers. In October 2016,
the government announced that more than a million of the 88 million Party
members had been investigated in the past three years during an intense 
campaign against corruption. By early this year, 176 Party cadres of the rank 
of Vice Minister and above had been dismissed on charges of corruption.
The Party mouthpiece People’s Daily complained in October 2016 against 
– 9 – 
 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
“lazy, foot-dragging officials” who were too “scared to do their jobs for fear
of being accused of taking bribes, while others were unwilling to act unless 
the kickbacks resumed”. It added “... those who complain or are nostalgic for
the good old days? Well, they are just ‘rotten with corruption!’” Xi Jinping
also cut the budget of the Communist Youth League (CYL) and initiated 
a programme to reduce its membership. At the same time, he initiated an 
austerity campaign to tackle corruption and ostentation in the Party and
mandated a regime of ‘one soup, four dishes’ at banquets. A large number
of restaurants and hotels have consequently closed down, but the austerity 
measures remain in place despite the estimated annual 2-4 per cent adverse 
impact on the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The economy is a major factor affecting society and China’s internal 
situation. The slowdown in growth has been faster than anticipated and the
forecast for economic growth in 2017 is now officially pegged at 6.5 per cent,
described by Premier Li Keqiang as the minimum essential for job creation.
Very few of the 300 reforms decided upon at the 3rd Party Plenum in 2013
have progressed. The 106 central State owned Enterprises (SoEs) have been
particularly resistant to reform,not least because most are headed by ‘princelings’.
For example, while the rules recommended a cap on the salaries of senior SoE
executives, the SoEs were permitted to themselves determine the salaries. The
shutting down of ‘zombie’ enterprises, often owned by SoEs, has also made
tardy progress, with pilot projects being undertaken in Shanghai. Some major
decisions have, however, been taken such as to lay off 5-6 million workers in
the coal, steel and mining industries between 2016-18. Official Chinese media
reports say that protests by workers have increased by an estimated 30 per cent
over the 210,000 reported officially in 2010. Unemployment of graduates is up
by 30 per cent, adding to the levels of popular dissatisfaction. Early this year,
responding to complaints by graduates of the lack of jobs, officials said there
were adequate jobs but not of the kind the graduates wanted! 
Reports of regular protests by veteran demobilised soldiers have surfaced 
and with 300,000 more demobilised soldiers likely to soon join their ranks
the number of protests could increase. Hundreds of Chinese military 
veterans demonstrated in mid-February 2017, outside the Central Discipline
Inspection Commission (CDIC) in central Beijing for two days, demanding 
– 10 – 
CHINA’S INTERNAL SITUATION BEFORE THE 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
unpaid retirement benefits. A smaller number protested outside the Ministry
of Civil Affairs the following day. In October 2016, more than 1,000 veterans 
demonstrated outside the Defence Ministry headquarters in Beijing.
Income inequality is also growing. Latest official Chinese figures state that
while disparity between provinces is gradually reducing, the gap between the
poor and rich is widening. As publicised during the National People’s Congress 
(NPC) session in March 2017, one-third of China’s wealth is owned by the
top one per cent households. There is also a lack of confidence in the country’s 
economy as evidenced by the continuing flight of capital. The People’s Bank of 
China (PBoC) has estimated that US$ 1 trillion has fled the country since 2015!
Poverty is causing considerable concern. At the Politburo meeting on
February 22, 2017, President Xi Jinping underscored the importance of 
“precision in the battle against poverty, saying that poverty relief targets should
be accomplished as scheduled”. Poverty alleviation was the focus again at the
Politburo meeting on March 31, 2017, as well as the NPC session that month.
To highlight the leadership’s concern, Xi Jinping has nominated himself as a
delegate to the 19th Congress from Guizhou, China’s poorest province.
Very high on the list of concerns of the CCP’s higher echelons are the 
perceived destabilisation efforts, or ‘colour revolution’, by the West. Early in 
April 2013, the CCP CC issued Document No. 9, which quoted Xi Jinping as 
saying“regime dissatisfaction often begins in the realm of ideas”.He complained 
of an intensification of Western cultural and ideological infiltration.The CCP 
launched a campaign to counter such elements. In January 2015, the CCP 
CC issued Document No. 30 strengthening Party control over primary and
secondary schools and universities. Also, in January 2015, the PRC Education 
Minister prohibited the use of Western sources for teaching, and Western 
books began being weeded out of university and college libraries.
In the third week of December 2016, a seven-and-a-half-minute video 
issued by the CCP CC Propaganda Department focussed on the dangers of 
a ‘colour revolution’ of which, it said, “Embassies in China are the forward 
command, combining forces to promote street politics”. The video, which 
has no title, was propagated online under the head “Who Most Wants to 
Overthrow China”. The theme was highlighted in a high-level conference in 
December 2016 to discuss strengthening of ideological controls in universities. 
– 11 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
During the conference, China’s Minister of Education, Chen Baosheng
observed that “the first option for hostile forces infiltrating us is our education 
system”. He added,“To wreck your future, first of all, they wreck your schools”.
Hong Kong was singled out as a “bridgehead” for subversion.The video ended 
with the assertion, “Thoroughly expelling ‘colour revolution’ will be a long war, 
but if there is war, we will answer the call”. 
Reflecting the CCP leadership’s concern, the 442,000 foreign students
studying in China have also—for the first time—been formally brought within
the purview of the Party’s controls. On June 5, 2017, China’s Ministries of 
Education, Foreign Affairs and Public Security jointly issued new regulations
which mandate that foreign students pursuing higher education diplomas in
China will have to take compulsory courses in Chinese.They require universities
and colleges to teach international students about China’s laws and regulations,
plus its institutions and traditional Chinese culture and customs, and require
international students majoring in philosophy and politics to take compulsory
political theories courses. The regulations state that they were made to “regulate
schools’admission, the cultivation and management of international students and
for the convenience of international students studying in schools in China”. The
regulations ban any form of religious activities on campus, such as preaching or
religious gatherings and say that schools should respect the customs and religious
beliefs of foreign students, but are not allowed to provide any venue for their 
religious activities. International students who do not live in school dormitories
are required to register their address with the police in the neighbourhood.
Universities and colleges are now also required to have “instructors” for foreign
students, following a similar practice of employing “political instructors” for
Chinese students. University political instructors have long been tasked with
political education and overseeing Chinese students’ ideological teaching.
The Social Credit Management system, which ensures total monitoring of all
residents in China, is planned to be implemented across China by 2018.
These measures are reinforced by the National Security Education 
Campaign launched in August 2016 amidst accusations of “hostile foreign
forces” meddling in China and fanning of domestic discontent. In April 
2017, Beijing announced incentives of up to US$ 72,000 for people providing
information on suspected spies. On May 16, 2017, China issued its first public 
– 12 – 
 
CHINA’S INTERNAL SITUATION BEFORE THE 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
draft of an Intelligence Law that is expansive and allows the detention and 
monitoring of suspects as well as search of their premises, seizure of vehicles 
and devices, and investigation of individuals and groups. Chinese citizens and 
foreigners are within the ambit of this law. There has also been a crackdown 
on human rights lawyers, with almost 300 arrested till May 2017.There is also 
apprehension that Buddhist monks, especially Tibetan Buddhist monks, have 
the potential of being guided and controlled from “outside”. Consequently,
since March 2017, controls are being enforced on the movements of monks 
and they have been directed to take prior permission for their ‘teachings’.
Additionally, there is an arc of vulnerability developing around China. The
Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) remains restive despite the implementation
of progressively restrictive security measures. While the ‘iron grid’ system
ensures a response to an incident by the security forces within 3-5 minutes of
the occurrence of an incident, the authorities introduced additional measures 
in early May 2017. The TAR Public Security Bureau (PSB) enhanced its
surveillance and rapid deployment capability across counties. The PSB budget
which was US$ 1 billion in 2014 was increased by 54 per cent in 2016 over the
previous year. However, the number of medical teams visiting the PLA and
People’s Armed Police (PAP) personnel deployed in the TAR to treat them
for post-traumatic stress disorders has increased from one to three each year.
Simultaneously, Party surveillance has been expanded, with efforts to recruit one 
Party member in each village in the TAR each year; 21,000 Party cadres also
fanned out to each of the TAR’s over 5,000 villages. Monks and monasteries
continue to be specially targeted, with Party cadres deployed in each monastery.
Tibetans still do not accept the China-appointed Gyaltsen Norbu as the
Panchen Lama, but only as a “learned monk”. There is also a divide between
the Hans and Tibetans, with China’s provincial media often reporting fights
between Han and Tibetan students.The issue of recognition of the Dalai Lama’s 
reincarnation is an additional complication. China’s strong reaction to the Dalai 
Lama’s visit to Arunachal Pradesh reflects these tensions in the TAR. 
There is also no sign of the tension and violence in the Xinjiang-Uyghur
Autonomous Region (XUAR) abating. The public security budget in Xinjiang
too was enhanced this year by 54 per cent from the US$ 1.05 billion last year.
A report issued last year by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) 
– 13 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
highlighted that incidents of terrorist violence by the Uyghurs were spreading
to other parts of the country with substantive Muslim populations. It said that
some countries, like Turkey were providing travel documents to the Uyghurs
to help them escape or enter Xinjiang through Southeast Asia, and that China
should not expect assistance from foreign countries. In the past few years,
provincial Communist cadres and delegates to the National People’s Congress
(NPC) have, unusually, named Pakistan as the source of support to the Uyghurs.
In May 2017, China expressed concern about the potential danger from the
Rohingyas in Myanmar being trained by the Islamic State. There are other
tensions developing on China’s periphery. Since Tsai Ing-wen of the Democratic
Progressive Party (DPP) took over as Taiwan’s President, tension has risen 
across the Taiwan Strait, with Beijing insisting that she has plans to “sneakily”
make a bid for independence. The telephone call between then US President
designate Trump and Tsai Ing-wen aroused deep suspicion in Beijing, with
Chinese analysts stating that “with the ruling DPP moving faster toward de
facto independence, China is now preparing for a final solution by non-peaceful
means, which is the last resort China would prefer to turn to”.
While political tensions in Hong Kong have seemingly settled for now, it 
was not before Beijing cracked down hard on the advocates of ‘independence’.
Beijing has also preempted any bid by Hong Kong residents to interpret 
the Basic Law, declaring that Beijing’s would be the final word. Differences 
between Hong Kong ‘independence’ groups and Beijing, however, remain.
When the 19th Party Congress reviews the achievements since the last 
Congress, it can be expected to positively evaluate the measures implemented
by Xi Jinping to ensure social stability and the CCP’s primacy. Despite the
pools of dissatisfaction comprising those adversely impacted, Xi Jinping has
initiated substantive steps to ‘professionalise’ the PLA and cleanse the Party.
As Xi Jinping begins his second term at the end of this year and advances the 
‘China Dream’ and ‘One Belt, One Road’, the hardening of the Chinese state
will continue.The ensuant inflexibility will mean that negotiations are unlikely 
to yield concessions. This will be evident as China pursues its claims in the 
South China Sea and in China’s relations with India and its neighbours. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on June 
11, 2017.) 
– 14 – 
3. China’s Internal Situation: 
Is Xi Jinping under Pressure? 
Social stability is a topmost concern for China’s leadership as they see it as 
essential for the perpetuation of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)’s 
monopoly on power.To achieve this, they play, to an extent, on the fears of the 
Chinese people of dongluang, or upheaval/chaos.
Despite the efforts of the CCP leadership, especially under Xi Jinping,
there is noticeable resentment and dissatisfaction.This has particularly marked 
his second term since the 19th Party Congress in October 2017.The trigger for 
the dissatisfaction was the abolition by Xi Jinping at the 19th Party Congress 
of the term limits on the top posts as well as his ignoring the informally
agreed upon age limits for the elevation of cadres to top positions like in the 
Politburo (PB) and Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC). These were set 
by Deng Xiaoping with the precise objective of preventing a recurrence of 
a situation wherein too much power is concentrated in the hands of a single 
leader, or avoiding one-man rule. CCP members, including retired veteran 
leaders, protested and posted open letters on the social media stating, “No 
return to Mao’s one-man rule”! At least a couple of letters urged Deputies 
to the National People’s Congress (NPC) to reject the proposal. Many Party 
members, including in the CCP Central Committee, still retain unpleasant 
memories of the Cultural Revolution. 
Independently, the economy was slowing and unemployment was rising.
Economic reforms had seen the closure of tens of thousands of small coal and 
iron ore mines, rendering tens of millions jobless. The move to shift from an 
export-led economy to a domestic-led one, which is taking considerably longer 
than anticipated, further slowed the economy as has the CCP’s preference for 
the State-owned Enterprises (SoEs). Unemployment grew to around 17-20 
million by the end of 2019.
Meanwhile, the military reforms had kicked in, adding to the number 
of unemployed. The demobilised and retired military veterans complained 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
that measures for their rehabilitation were unsatisfactory and their pensions
and allowances inadequate. They staged some major protests, prompting the
leadership to address their grievances and set up the Ministry of Veterans 
Affairs to pacify them. Apprehensive that this discontent could spread to the 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA), steps were taken to get them ‘respect’ in 
society and arrange jobs on a preferential basis.
But these pressures were exacerbated by two more events: the US-China 
trade war and the coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic.
Xi Jinping’s bold enunciation of a roadmap for China’s future ambitions 
was the trigger for the US-China trade war. During the 19th Party Congress,
Chinese President Xi Jinping announced that he would achieve the ‘China 
Dream’ by 2021, ‘Made in China’ by 2025, modernisation of the PLA by
2035, and make China a “major power with global pioneering influence”
by 2049! With this announcement, he effectively put the US on notice that
China would be a ‘rival’. Additionally, he underscored China’s potential global
leadership role when he reiterated his proposal of a “Community of Common
Destiny”and offered the Chinese system of governance as an alternative to the 
world’s democracies. 
The US identified technology as the key driver of China’s modernisation 
efforts and ambitions and targeted that. The first sanctions were applied
on China’s telecommunications company ZTE which, with access to US 
markets and critical components blocked, became virtually bankrupt.
The second company to be targeted was China’s leading technology and
telecommunications company, Huawei. Meng Wangzhou, Chief Financial 
Officer (CFO) and daughter of Huawei’s founder Ren Zhengfei , was charged
with violations of US sanctions on Iran and falsification of accounts, and 
proceedings to extradite her to the US were started in Canada. US companies 
were banned from selling Huawei and ZTE micro-chips, wafers, imaging
laser chips, etc. After the initial bluster that it had adequate reserves of these 
specialised micro-chips, wafers, etc., Huawei had to finally admit that it was 
in serious trouble and was stopping the manufacture of smart phones from
mid-September 2020. There was simultaneously a pushback on Huawei’s 
flagship fifth generation (5G) project, with the roll out of which Huawei 
expected to become a world leader of telecom and set global standards for the 
– 16 – 
CHINA’S INTERNAL SITUATION: IS XI JINPING UNDER PRESSURE? 
international market. All this severely hit China’s technology sector and stocks 
plummeted further, contributing to China’s economic slowdown. Meanwhile,
the US expanded the scope of sanctions and said it would issue a letter to 
warn chip suppliers like Taiwan’s SMIC to stop exports to China and Huawei.
SMIC’s shares have subsequently dropped.
The US also began pushing back on China’s Belt and Road Initiative 
(BRI) following India’s lead. 
COVID-19 (coronavirus) has severely impacted China. Unemployment 
soared in March-April 2020 to 80-90 million from the 17-20 million at 
the end of 2019. Factories, shops, restaurants and small businesses closed,
rendering millions jobless. More than 300 million workers who had returned 
to their villages have not yet come back for work. Agriculture too has been 
impacted, with grain and pork prices registering sharp increases.
At the same time, COVID-19 fuelled a huge surge in anti-China
sentiment across the world. The China Institutes of Contemporary
International Relations (CICIR), a think-tank of China’s Ministry of State 
Security, in its briefing to a meeting of the Politburo chaired by Xi Jinping in
April 2020, reported that anti-China sentiment was globally at an all-time 
high. The same month, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), in 
a separate assessment, concurred and proposed recommendations on how to 
change the mood among opinion-makers in the US. A PLA Daily editorial 
similarly highlighted China’s tense domestic situation and warned that the 
US could use this to fan social upheaval and provoke social conflict. Hu Xijin,
the Editor-in-Chief of the CCP-owned Global Times lamented in an article 
earlier in September that “China has been left friendless”! 
Professor Xu Xiaonian, a well-known Chinese economist, said at a 
conference that “so long as the pandemic continues in Europe and US,
Chinese export companies will have no orders, workers will have no wages,
and there will be no consumption and a recession is inevitable”. He pointed
out that China’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is one-fifth that of the US 
and one-fourth that of Europe. Ma Jun, an academician and member of the 
People’s Bank of China’s (PBoC’s) monetary policy committee, endorsed these 
remarks and said Chinese “growth will largely depend on how the pandemic
develops in Europe and the US”. 
– 17 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Despite protestations to the contrary, the economic prospects are not 
bright, if not bleak. Prominent Chinese businessmen, including Jack Ma of 
Alibaba and Li Chuanzhi of Lenovo signed a letter addressed to Xi Jinping 
calling for urgent reforms and handed it over to Chinese Premier Li Keqiang at
a conference in March 2020. There is serious concern about economic growth 
and there was considerable debate on whether the Chinese government should 
mention a growth rate target in its Work Report to the National People’s 
Congress (NPC) plenary session in March 2020. Finally, for the first time in 
the history of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), it was decided not to 
mention it. Further reflecting the economic distress caused by the COVID-19 
pandemic, the budgets of all Central Ministries, except notably the Ministry
of Public Security, were cut by 50 per cent.
Continuing through 2018 till date, there has been a steady stream of 
criticism of the CCP and Xi Jinping. Reputed academics, intellectuals,
economists, senior Party members and, importantly, ‘princelings’ posted
their criticism on China’s social media. These included persons like Tsinghua
Professors Xu Zhangrun and Xu Zhiyou, former Central Party School senior 
faculty Cai Xia, etc. Their posts remained on social media for days and even 
longer despite claims by China’s internet security administrators that they can 
remove “offending posts” within minutes. This suggests tacit connivance.
Unprecedented in these posts was the direct criticism of the CCP 
and personal criticism by name of Xi Jinping. Among the few that were
especially scathing in their criticism were the reputed Tsinghua University
Professor Xu Zhangrun, who authored a 6,246-word essay on February 5,
captioned “Angry People No Longer Fear”, which went viral on China’s 
social media. It accused China’s leaders and specifically Xi Jinping of
being out of touch with the people’s needs. On March 2, and February
23, 2020, Zhao Shilin, a retired Professor of China’s Minzu University,
Deputy Director of the Culture and Arts Commission and former member
of the CCP CC, posted two open letters to President Xi Jinping, both of
which were scathing in their criticism. In an interview to the Guardian 
in August, Cai Xia, former senior Professor of the Central Party School,
stated that Xi Jinping had “killed the Party and country”! She added that
he seeks to divert the attention of the Chinese public by provoking conflict 
– 18 – 
CHINA’S INTERNAL SITUATION: IS XI JINPING UNDER PRESSURE? 
with other countries—and that examples include encouraging antiAmerican sentiment as well as the recent clashes with India. On March 
23, Ren Zhiqiang, a princeling and Chinese realty tycoon wrote an opinion
piece, in which he called Xi Jinping a “clown”.
The Chinese authorities cracked down on these critics. Xu Zhangrun,
known for his scathing and public criticisms of Xi Jinping, was detained in July
this year. After publishing several public attacks on the Chinese leadership, Xu 
Zhiyou was placed under house arrest earlier this year. Former Central Party
School Professor Cai Xia, who has settled in the US, was deprived of her 
pension and all financial benefits.
Xi Jinping is under definite immense pressure, but true to character, he 
is not stepping down or yielding ground: he is fighting back and has cracked 
down on dissidents. Security measures have been made even more restrictive.
For example, Ren Zhiqiang, despite being a ‘princeling’ and the pleas for
his release, was arrested and finally awarded an exceptionally lengthy prison 
sentence. The message that Xi Jinping is sending is that he will spare no one.
Meanwhile, the US has decided to place sanctions on those CCP leaders 
who take active part in formulating or implementing harsh policies against
the people. Sanctions have been imposed on the cadres in Xinjiang and Hong
Kong, including Xinjiang Party Secretary Chen Quanguo and Hong Kong
Chief Executive Carrie Lam.This will render vulnerable any assets they might 
have abroad.US Secretary of State Pompeo additionally proposed that Chinese
Communist Party members and their families could be banned from getting
US visas. This sent shockwaves through the CCP as it will directly impact
many Party cadres who have assets illegally stashed in the US or abroad, or 
have close relatives studying there. Almost 70 per cent of Communist Party
members at and above the department level have children studying in the US,
UK, Canada and Australia, and all of them could face problems.
In the wake of steadily increasing US pressure on China in recent 
months, escalated by the imposition of sanctions against CCP cadres and the 
proposal to ban US visas to members of the CCP, Xi Jinping has not yielded 
ground. Instead, he has launched a number of new ideological campaigns to 
strengthen adherence by the Party’s 92 million members to the CCP’s policies
and principles and ensure that they do not waver. These campaigns stress the 
– 19 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
‘four consciousnesses’, consolidate the ‘four confidences’, and particularly
emphasise the ‘two safeguards’ or ‘two maintenances’. The two maintenances 
are “maintaining the core position of General Secretary Xi Jinping means
maintaining the authority of the Party Central Committee and centralised and
unified leadership; maintaining the authority of the Party Central Committee
and centralised and unified leadership must first maintain the core position of
General Secretary Xi Jinping.” These are accompanied by efforts to advance 
global ‘understanding’ and ‘appeal’ of the Chinese system.
On the economic front too, Xi Jinping is pushing ahead with plans to
achieve China’s long-term goals. Work has begun on the next Five-Year-Plan 
(2020-25) but Xi Jinping has also directed the Politburo to work out goals for
2035! 
For China, the road ahead seems difficult and if the US pressure continues,
there will be a pronounced economic downturn, hampering China’s global
ambitions. This will affect Xi Jinping’s position. For him to remain in power,
a lot depends on how many cadres are opposed to him and if their number
increases to a critical mass, it can result in his being compelled to step down.
Within the Politburo, all the members are not of his faction, for example,
Li Keqiang, Han Zheng and Wang Yang. Security for Xi Jinping has also
been increased. One can assess that there is continuing uncertainty in China,
including of Xi Jinping’s future. 
(Text of speech at the CCAS-KAS Diginar on “China’s Internal Situation: Is Xi Jinping Under 
Pressure”, on September 15, 2020.) 
– 20 – 
THE CHINA DREAM
4. The China Dream
 
An idea never dies and the Chinese elite understood that centuries ago!
The ‘China Dream’ or the idea of making China great again has been
espoused by Chinese leaders for more than a couple of centuries and it 
continues to resonate with the Chinese people. The first popular expression 
of this sentiment was the Boxer Rebellion (1889-1901), which was antiimperialist, anti-foreign and anti-Christian—together crystalising into 
resentment against the colonial powers who had divided China, as the 
Chinese say, “like an over-ripe pomegranate”! The narrative being propagated
by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership of “a hundred years of 
humiliation” is part of this. Chinese leaders, including Mao Zedong and the
founders of the CCP in 1921, have articulated this with varying intensity. One 
reason why it is called the ‘China Dream’ and not the Chinese Dream is that 
this is an idea that has inspired Chinese leaders and the leadership elite, and 
not the Chinese masses. 
Formulated in its present form initially by People’s Liberation Army
(PLA) Col Liu Mingfu, the idea gained wide traction in China—particularly
among children of veteran Party leaders and Communist cadres—after he 
published it as a book entitled The China Dream in 2010. The book became a 
bestseller in China. Xi Jinping, within days of taking over as General Secretary
of the CCP and Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC) in
November 2012, quoted from the book on quite a few occasions, thereby 
according its contents legitimacy. Though now retired from the PLA, Liu 
Mingfu continues to be a Professor in the prestigious PLA National Defence 
University (NDU).
Xi Jinping referred to the ‘China Dream’ at the 18th Party Congress 
in November 2012, when he was appointed General Secretary of the CCP,
Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC) and President of 
China. At the Congress, he declared that he would achieve the ‘China Dream’ 
by 2021 — the centenary year of the CCP! He elaborated on this concept 
– 21 – 
 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
at the 19th Party Congress held in October 2017, when he presented a bold 
timetable for China’s rise and announced: the ‘China Dream’—2021; ‘Made 
in China’-2025; and that China would become a “major world power with 
pioneering global influence” by 2049!
It is important to understand the formulations. The ‘China Dream’,
to be achieved by 2021 includes making the Chinese people prosperous—
or abolition of poverty; making the Chinese nation wealthy; and “the
rejuvenation of the great Chinese nation”. The last promise includes the
“recovery of sovereignty over Chinese territory lost through the imposition
of unequal treaties by hostile foreign powers”. This last reference is to the
“hundred years of humiliation” that the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)
repeats consistently in its narratives.
In December 2012, after the 18th Party Congress, members of the
top advisory body, the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference
(CPPCC), fanned out across the world to brief governments, strategic
communities and opinion-makers on the 18th Party Congress and the
‘China Dream’. In Delhi, one CPPCC Vice Chairman quite candidly said,
in reply to a question about whether China would take back territories
which are now within the sovereign possession of other countries, “We
studied what is China’s in our school history and geography books. We 
will get it back!” 
At the 19th Party Congress in October 2017, Xi Jinping spelt out all the
components of the ‘China Dream’ and gave the target dates for achieving each.
The dates are important: 2021, for example, is the centenary year of the CCP 
and 2049 is the hundredth year of the founding of the People’s Republic of
China (PRC). For the CCP, both dates are very important to its legitimacy
and its monopoly on power as China’s sole ruling party. In other words, the 
‘China Dream’ is welded to the Party’s existence and continuance as the sole 
ruling Party.
The ‘China Dream’ is not just a military ambition, but encompasses a
whole range of national aspirations. Most importantly, it includes the idea 
of ‘Community of Common Destiny’, or China’s alternative to the current 
system of democracies and values. A few examples to illustrate the scope of
China’s ambitions are briefly mentioned below. 
– 22 – 
 
THE CHINA DREAM 
R5	 Culture and ‘Soft Power’: Xi Jinping’s predecessor, Hu Jintao, had decided 
that the time had come for China to push its viewpoint across the world 
and project a positive image. China initially invested US$ 6.6 billion 
in the effort. The state-owned China Central Television’s (CCTV’s)
international channel was revamped as China Global Television Network 
(CGTN), editions of Chinese newspapers like the People’s Daily began
being published abroad, and a boost was given to spreading the Chinese
language, culture, food, etc. It was felt that the negative image of China
and the Chinese being projected by Hollywood needed to change and
Chinese State-owned Enterprises (SoEs) began investing in Hollywood 
films and well-known foreign directors, with instructions to portray
China and the Chinese in a positive light. Hollywood is attracted also by
the rich pickings at China’s box office. 
R5	 Chinese Language and ‘Influence Operations’: China has been setting
up Confucius Institutes in higher educational institutes and Confucius 
Classrooms in schools of various countries ostensibly to facilitate the 
spread of the Chinese language and culture.The Director of the Confucius 
Institute is selected by them as are the teachers, and the subjects taught
conform with China’s approved version. For example, on Tibet, Taiwan,
the Sino-Indian War of 1962, India-China relations, etc. it will be the 
Chinese official version that is taught. Also, they decide which subjects 
and topics can be discussed. China had set up at least 100 Confucius 
Institutes in the US before the colleges/universities began shutting them
down in the past some months. China had spent approximately US$ 200
million on these institutes till 2016. It has been making consistent efforts 
to try and set them up in India too. China has additionally stepped up
‘influence operations’ in the past 2-3 years, including in India.The focus is 
on academics, journalists, younger politicians, opinion-makers et al, who 
are enticed by visits, scholarships, cash, etc. 
R5	 Diplomatic Constituency: China has used its US$ 14 trillion economy to
build a constituency of support in world organisations, including the UN,
and make inroads into the resource rich African continent, the Middle 
East, divide the European Union (EU) and drive a wedge between Europe
and the US. In Africa, it spent US$ 631 million in 2003, increasing to 
– 23 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
US$ 3 billion in 2015, and still rising, and invested Euros 37.2 billion in 
the EU. It has made substantial investments in countries within India’s 
strategic space namely Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri Lanka 
and Maldives. It continues to be unyielding in its efforts with Bhutan.The 
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is a prime geostrategic initiative which 
facilitates this. 
R5	 Artificial Intelligence (AI): Recognising AI as the technology of the future,
China initially invested Yuan 500 billion for Research and Development
(R&D), etc. and US$ 1 billion each year since 2013 in government 
funding for start-ups, augmented by an equal amount brought by private 
venture capital. The Digital Silk Road announced by Chinese President 
Xi Jinping to complement the BRI has been quickly exploited by Chinese 
information and telecommunication companies like Huawei and ZTE.
Huawei is now already present in 30 countries along the BRI and has 
set up AI and cyber nodes in some places. China’s aim is to be the global
leader in AI and cyber, and write the rules governing them.
R5	 Quantum Technologies: China has recognised the potential of quantum
science and technology to enhance the economic and military dimensions 
of national power and is positioning itself to be a leader in the “second 
quantum revolution”. China’s leadership has provided extensive funding
to this sector and actively cultivated top talent. The Civil-Military Fusion 
programme is a major contributor. Chinese researchers have made major
advances in basic research and development of quantum technologies,
including quantum cryptography, communications, and computing, and 
have made progress in quantum radar, sensing, imaging, meteorology,
and navigation. China is making extensive use of secure quantum 
cryptography and quantum communications. It exhibited its prowess 
in quantum science in August 2016 with the launch of the world’s first 
quantum satellite, Micius (or Mozi, ໘ᆀ) and, since then, the launch 
of new national ‘megaprojects’ in quantum communications. China’s 
quantum ambitions are part of its national strategic objective to become a 
science and technology superpower. 
R5	 Landing on Mars: Zhang Yulin, former chief of the China Manned Space 
Engineering Office (CMSEO), was quoted by the Science and Technology 
– 24 – 
THE CHINA DREAM 
Daily as saying that Beijing plans to launch a Mars exploration mission in
2020 and a Mars landing in 2021—the centenary year of the founding of
the CCP! China’s annual investment in space projects is as high as US$ 8
billion, second only to the United States. 
R5	 Earth-Moon Economic Zone: Bao Weimin, Director of the Science 
and Technology Commission of the China Aerospace Science and 
Technology Corporation (CASC), the main state-owned contractor 
for China’s space programme, has disclosed that China is planning to
establish an Earth-Moon economic zone by 2050. Experts predict 
that China’s annual output in the zone may reach US$10 trillion. Bao 
Weimin added that China should develop a reliable and low-cost space 
transportation system between the Earth and the Moon. According to its
plan, China will accomplish the basic technology development by 2030 
and the manufacture of key transportation technologies by 2040. China 
hopes to successfully establish a space economic zone by the middle of 
this century—the hundredth year of the founding of the PRC! 
R5	 Domestic Campaign: Aware that domestic support is imperative, Xi 
Jinping has sought to reinforce the ideological and ‘political education’
campaigns begun since November 2012.Two years ago,Xi Jinping initiated
a vigorous ‘Red Genes’ campaign throughout the Party and PLA, which is 
continuing. Its objective is to instill in the cadres the same aspirations as 
those of the ‘Red Descendants’, or children of Communist cadres, so that 
they will carry forward the torch of the ‘China Dream’. China’s Ministry
of Education issued a document in 2018, asserting “the need to nurture a 
new man of the era, who will take up the great responsibility of national 
rejuvenation”! 
In other words, the ‘China Dream’ is a programme intended to build
national power, and China into a rival of the US or capable of overtaking
it. Chinese leaders, starting from former Chinese President Hu Jintao, have 
proposed a “new type of big power relationship” with the US so that the two 
could be partners in managing global affairs. The US has declined to respond.
Beijing, however, now feels its time has come. With the ‘China Dream’, it 
feels that by 2049 it will overtake the US in AI, cyber, fifth generation (5G) 
– 25 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
information and telecommunications technology, have a larger diplomatic
constituency supporting it, be bigger militarily—the PLA Navy already
matches the US Navy in tonnage—and dominate the South China Sea, and 
effect the ‘recovery’ of Taiwan! 
The PLA has an important role and China has definite plans to realise 
the modernisation of the PLA and its territorial ambitions. In addition to 
streamlining and downsizing the personnel strength of the PLA and making
it a hi-tech force—the Strategic Support Force and PLA Rocket Force are 
examples—China aims to fully mechanise it by 2020; modernise it by 2035;
and make it a “world class military by the mid-21st century or 2049”. The 
declared objective is to make AI an integral part of the PLA and shift the 
PLA from ‘informationisation’ to ‘intelligentisation’. China’s leaders have 
invested a lot in new capabilities and technologies.This is evidenced by China’s 
third aircraft carrier going for its ninth sea trials; modern Aegis class frigates
being produced at the rate of one every three months; China inducting the
J-20, its indigenous fifth generation ‘stealth’ fighter jet into the PLA Air 
Force (PLAAF) while commencing work on the sixth generation fighter; and 
commencing work on unmanned, or ‘autonomous’, battlefield platforms like
tanks.The unwavering focus on making the military a world class force capable
of “fighting and winning” a war, suggests that China’s leaders are preparing the
PLA for a potentially muscular role in realising their objectives. 
In this context, an interview given by PLA Col Liu Mingfu (Retd) to the
Asahi Shimbun in May 2019 is pertinent, especially for India. Asked about 
China’s territorial ambitions and what its limits would be, Liu Mingfu replied
that the map used by “the current Chinese government is the clear standard 
for national sovereignty and territory”. This implicitly refers to the East Sea 
or Sea of Japan, the Senkaku Islands or Diaoyu Islands, South China Sea,
Taiwan, and India’s Ladakh, Jammu and Kashmir ( J&K) and Arunachal 
Pradesh. Liu Mingfu also hinted at the possible use of force, probably in the
context of Taiwan, by stating that “as time passes, the gap in national power 
with China will become less for the US”. 
Finally, the ‘China Dream’ has thus far progressed well with China’s US$ 
14 trillion economy smoothening the way. But difficulties are now beginning 
to surface. To list a few: there is growing concern about the BRI; the US 
– 26 – 
THE CHINA DREAM 
has targeted China’s technology sector or ‘Made in China’ and has begun to 
restrict its access to the US market; Europe is apprehensive about the BRI, the 
Maritime Silk Road and Digital Silk Route and has begun to examine ways
to restrict the flow of hi-tech to China; India, Japan, Indonesia and Australia 
will, at least, not accept China’s dominance; the restive minority-dominated
Autonomous Regions of Xinjiang and Tibet are not likely to be calmed any
time soon; and the troubles in Hong Kong, now entering their sixth month, are 
an indicator of the limits of the CCP’s power and potential for disturbances 
to spread inside China. The road ahead for the China Dream is difficult, but 
attempts to frustrate its realisation would require sustained efforts as China’s
leaders have noticeably energised diverse nationalist aspirations to converge
into making China a leading global power. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
November 22, 2019.) 
– 27 – 
   
5. China: Path to Hi-Technology
 
The world is on the threshold of major technology advances that will translate 
what has so far been in the realm of science fiction into everyday reality.There 
is clear promise of transformational changes, with the next couple of decades 
being witness to technology driving almost every aspect of life.
Signs of this are already visible in robotics; artificial intelligence; 
telecommunications, especially voice and data transmission; Internet 
of Things; seamless linkage of public utilities and items of everyday 
use; machine-to-machine communications; unmanned automobiles; 
biomedicine; and treatment of serious injuries to humans on the battlefield.
In the race not to be left behind in a world of advanced technologies, the US,
Russia, some European countries and China have been working on different
aspects of these technologies for a while. Taiwan, South Korea and Vietnam
too have been getting ready to compete globally in fifth generation (5G)
communications. 
China is striving to progress in hi-tech research areas like organelles to 
build tissue for soldiers injured in war and 3-D printing to build weapons 
on the battlefield. It finalised a Civil-Military Fusion Programme so that 
hi-tech advances made by the military and civilian private industry could be 
pooled and optimised. China has made huge capital investment in Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), already crafted an AI policy and holds more patents than 
the US. Its People’s Liberation Army (PLA)-affiliated information and 
telecommunications companies like Huawei and ZTE are exerting to roll out 
5G networks across the world—Huawei is already present in fifty countries! 
China has also made great strides in quantum communications. Interestingly,
though, Beijing has chosen to go in for the 5G networks of Ericsson and Nokia 
inside China! 
Cognisant that advanced technology is the future, China has made clear
that it is willing to suffer short-term pain to become a leading global power
in technology. Despite its huge surplus manpower, China chose to train and 
CHINA: PATH TO HI-TECHNOLOGY 
upgrade manpower skills and opted for robotics in its factories. In 2017,
China bought 36 per cent of all factory robots in the world, more than any
other country, including the US, with the aim of boosting its own production
of robots to become the preeminent technological superpower. By 2019,
China had the largest number of factories using robotics. A consideration
would have been the longer-term challenge that China faces of its working
age population declining. China’s workforce started to drop in 2012, with
the slide gathering pace in the 2020s and predicted to fall by over 20 per
cent, or around 210 million, by 2050. In other words, against the present
about 7 workers for each retiree, by the 2040s, this will have fallen to 2.5
workers! 
China’s leadership was prescient in recognising the importance of 
advanced technology and its potential for varied applications. The ‘Long
March’ era of Chinese leaders understood that without technology, China 
could again be subject to ‘bullying’ by the major powers, with Mao Zedong
himself harbouring apprehensions about the US and Soviet Union with their 
atom bombs. There have been three factors that put China on the track of 
acquiring and developing advanced technology. These were: (i) Mao’s vision 
of the future China; (ii) dominance of the military in China’s politics; and 
(iii) the wave of nationalist sentiment in the wake of China’s ‘liberation’ and 
leadership-led programme which combined to persuade Chinese scientists to 
return to serve the Mainland. 
This is reinforced by the substantive presence of senior Party cadres 
with scientific backgrounds. There are 14 members in the new 19th Central 
Committee (CC) of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) who have a 
background in academics and universities, especially in aeronautical sciences 
indicating a focus on Research and Development (R&D) and scientific 
research. 
Three key areas will help provide a clear idea of China’s ambitions and 
goals. These are Civil-Military Fusion, also called Civil-Military Integration
and which is the foundation for China’s Science and Technology (S&T)
effort; Artificial Intelligence; and 5G S&T information and communications 
technology. 
– 29 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Civil-Military Fusion (ߋ≁㶽ਸ/Civil-Military Integration 
Civil-military fusion  (ߋ≁㶽ਸ)—also called ‘civil-military integration’—is 
an important policy enunciated, with some variations, by Mao Zedong, Deng
Xiaoping,Hu Jintao and Xi Jinping, and is inextricably intertwined with China 
becoming an advanced world technology power as envisaged in ‘Made in 
China-2025’. The “China Military-Civilian Integration Development Report 
2014” issued by the National Defence Economic Research Centre of the PLA 
National Defence University revealed that China’s military-civilian integration 
is around 30 per cent. Xi Jinping acknowledged that many private high-tech 
enterprises in China are technologically advanced, have great potential for
development and can tie up with traditional defense military enterprises to 
mutual advantage. On March 12, 2015, at the plenary meeting of the PLA 
delegation of the Third Session of the 12th National People’s Congress of 
China, Xi Jinping, for the first time, stressed on the need for “improving the
integration of military and civilian development into a national strategy”. In 
January 2017,the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Central Committee (CC)
Political Bureau (PB) established a Central Military-Civilian Integration
Development Committee, with Xi Jinping as its Chairman. The Central 
Military-Civilian Integration Development Committee is responsible for the
in-depth development of military and civilian integration.
The CCP CC, with “Xi Jinping as its core”, closely links the development 
of military-civilian integration with the “realization of the great rejuvenation of 
the Chinese nation”. It promotes interaction between China’s national defence 
construction and economic construction as the only way to realise the dream of 
strengthening the country and strengthening the military and, in effect, blends 
guarding national sovereignty, security, and development interests. Civilmilitary fusion has been backed by the heads of prominent Chinese military
State-owned Enterprises (SoEs). In March 2017, Peng Jianwei, President 
of the Beijing Modern Industrial Planning Research Institute, told China 
Enterprise News that the integration of military and civilian development as
a national strategy is related to the overall situation of national security and
economic development, and the enthusiasm of social capital to participate
in the military industry is constantly rising. He assessed that with more 
social capital participation, China’s military-civilian integration process will 
– 30 – 
CHINA: PATH TO HI-TECHNOLOGY 
continue to accelerate. He added, however, “It is undeniable that the current 
development of military-civilian integration in China is still facing a series 
of challenges such as insufficient channels, inadequate institutional barriers,
and inadequate transformation of ideas and concepts, which has greatly
affected the pace of military-civilian integration”. Gao Hongwei, Chairman 
of the military industrial enterprise Aerospace Science and Technology,
anticipated, “In 2017, the revenue of the military-civilian integration industry
of the group company will reach 147 billion yuan” and collaborative research 
and development of the military-civilian integration industry will gradually
improve the R&D capabilities and combine innovation with entrepreneurship.
More forthcoming was Lu Guangshan, Chairman of AVIC Aerospace, who 
said the military industry is a priority area for cutting-edge technology and
a gathering place for disruptive innovation. “From the current point of view,
China’s military-civilian integration industry has a very broad prospect, such 
as general aviation, Beidou satellite navigation, commercial space launch,
and network security. Every industry has a market scale of trillions.” Guo 
Zhengbiao, Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Nanjing World-based 
Space-Based Communication Technology Co., Ltd., who is a founder of a 
start-up and a serial entrepreneur, said that there were many entrepreneurs 
who are willing to participate in the “military and civilian integration.” He 
observed that there are, however, many obstacles impeding such integration, 
including mindsets of discrimination against private enterprises, small size of 
private enterprises that lack adequate funds, technology, equipment, etc., and 
unwillingness of some central enterprises to take risks and cooperate with
small and medium-sized enterprises.
The Chinese authorities, including in the provinces, were quick to initiate 
efforts to promote civil-military fusion and persuade private companies to 
participate in the joint development and manufacture of military equipment
and systems. In September 2017, for example, Beijing held its third Integrated
Military and Civilian Development Technology and Equipment Exhibition,
at which 354 companies from across China displayed 422 new logistics and
defence technologies. Guancha.cn, a privately run news and commentary 
website that is usually enthusiastic about the Party line, headlined its report 
(in Chinese) on the one-week exhibition of the “Third Military-Civilian 
– 31 – 
    
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Integration Development High-Tech Equipment Achievements Forum”
in Beijing. It observed that all 422 exhibits were “blackware” or  “black 
technology” (唁、ᢰ/hēi kējì)—a slang term that refers to very advanced 
‘alien’ weapons and technology. On April 9, 2018, Xi Jiayin, Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the Evergrande Group, announced the official entry
of the group into the high-technology industry and signed a contract with
the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He declared that in the next ten years,
Evergrande will invest Yuan 100 billion in the hi-tech areas of life sciences,
aerospace, integrated circuit, quantum science and technology, new power 
sources, artificial intelligence, robotics and modern agricultural science and 
technology.
Other examples include the Beijing Civil-Military Integration Expo
2019 held in Beijing from May 6 to 8, 2019, to promote military-civil trade,
especially between China and countries involved in the Belt and Road 
Initiative. It displayed a wide range of dual-use military and civil products 
such as marine equipment, unmanned vehicles, communications systems, and 
network security products. The China Electronics International Exhibition 
Advertising Co Ltd, China National Electronics Import & Export Corp,
CETC International Co Ltd, and Poly Defense Research Centre hosted 
the Expo which was held at the China International Exhibition Centre 
( Jing’anzhuang Mansion). 
Xinhua reported on February 26, 2019, that the PLA and Chengyang
district in Qingdao are creating a Model for Deep Development of
Military and Civil Integration. The person in charge of Chengyang district,
said that the “Chengyang Military-Civilian Integration Industrial Park
Project” would have a total investment of about Yuan 2.34 billion to create 
a modernisation integrating technology R&D centre, business incubation,
industrial agglomeration, academic exchange, and technology finance. It said 
a technical team of Professors and PhDs has undertaken the transformation 
of advanced technological achievements and market expansion of the PLA 
Information Engineering University and Qingdao Ocean University. Latest 
statistics showed that Chengyang district has 20 military-civilian integration 
enterprises such as radar, electronic information and special vehicles, and 
the national high-speed train technology innovation centre. The integration 
– 32 – 
CHINA: PATH TO HI-TECHNOLOGY 
development demonstration project library has a total investment of Yuan 
1.5 billion. The city of Chongqing has proposed developing a model 5G 
network and applications demonstration with involvement from China 
Telecom, China Mobile and China Aerospace Science and Technology
Corporation, a major defence industry conglomerate. Similarly, Sichuan plans 
to promote partnerships for military-civil fusion in 5G as Beijing develops the
Zhongguonancun Science Park. At least 36 national-level industrial zones to 
promote civil-military fusion have opened across China.
AI is another priority area for civil-military fusion. The Financial Times 
last year published a photograph of Mao Yongqing, head of the 28th Research 
Institute of China Electronics Technology Group, which develops electronic 
warfare technology for the PLA, and Yin Shiming, Vice President of Cloud 
Computing at Baidu, one of China’s privately owned internet groups, at a 
conference in Nanjing. Mao Yongqing is one of a small group of state cadres 
entrusted by Chinese President Xi Jinping with the task of pushing the
military into the era of Artificial Intelligence. Yin Shiming is an engineer who
built his expertise at some of the most important Western tech companies,
including Apple. At the ceremony, Mao Yongqing and Yin Shiming declared 
China Electronics Technology Group Corporation (CETC) and Baidu to be 
partners in a “joint lab for intelligent command and control technology”—the 
facilities that are used to direct military operations.  Mao Yongqing  lauded 
the deal as an example of “military-civil fusion”. Yin Shiming  said CETC
and Baidu should “work hand-in-hand to link up computing, data and logic 
resources to further advance the application of new generation AI technologies
in the area of defence.” 
Reporting on civil-military fusion, the PLA Daily (March 2, 2019), said 
that in the past 40 years of reform and opening up, China’s private enterprises 
have accumulated a large number of advanced technologies and products 
through introduction, absorption, transformation and independent research 
and development. It said that they have become the main force in national 
economic construction and a new force in the construction of national defence 
forces. It said that by the end of 2017, nearly 10,000 private enterprises of 
the 27.72 million private enterprises in the country had entered national 
defence and military construction.Thousands of private enterprises are deeply 
– 33 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
involved in the research, production, maintenance and technical services of 
weapons and equipment. Regrettably, the speed of the “civilians’ participation
in the Army” and “military and civil integration” is still slow. In local areas 
and for a certain period of time, there is even a phenomenon of slowing down
or stagnation. The door of the “civilians’ participation in the Army” has been 
fully opened, and the barriers of “military-civil integration” have been basically
dismantled, it said. On why the above-mentioned phenomena occur in the
integration of the military and the civilians, the PLA Daily said it is due 
to the special nature of military characteristics and market rules. Weapons
and equipment are special products exported by the military industry. It has 
inherent attributes such as monopoly production, targeted sales, complicated 
technology, difficult development, and high quality standards.This determines 
the characteristics of the military market with a relatively small volume, strict 
control of plans, large changes in demand, long procurement cycle, and slow 
return on profits. Private enterprises have long been away from the military
environment, the foundation is relatively weak, the products are relatively
single, and the management is relatively loose, lacking competitive experience.
It is imperative that we work hard and streamline procedures without reducing
standards the PLA Daily said. 
Pointing to the potential for civil-military fusion, official Chinese 
statistics state that there were more than 80,000 high-tech private enterprises 
in China in 2017, with the output value of more than 1,500 exceeding Yuan 
100 million. Some enterprises have reached or exceeded the military standard 
in the fields of new materials, electronics, information and other fields. The 
statistics, however, disclosed that less than 1 per cent can presently participate
in equipment research and production. 
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
The “13th Five-Year Plan for Developing National Strategic and Emerging
Industries” (2016-20) identified AI development as the 6th among 69 major
tasks for the central government to pursue. It received impetus after the 
19th Party Congress in October 2017, when Chinese President Xi Jinping
declared that he would like to see China as “a scientific and technology power 
superpower”. 
– 34 – 
CHINA: PATH TO HI-TECHNOLOGY 
China sees AI as one of the leading technologies of the next decade 
with its predictive capabilities ensuring its application in maintaining social
stability (predicting social unrest),military (graduating from informationisation 
to intelligentisation), medicine, etc. The State Council has formulated an AI 
superpower strategy (ӪᐕᲪ㜭ᕪഭᡈ⮕) which envisages an ambitious
three-stage process aimed at China leading the world in AI. It outlines that 
by 2020, China’s AI industry will be “in line” with that of the most advanced 
countries, with a core AI industry gross output exceeding RMB 150 billion
(US$ 22.5 billion) and AI-related industry gross output exceeding RMB 1 
trillion (US$ 150.8 billion); by 2025, China should reach a “world-leading”
level in some AI fields, with a core AI industry gross output exceeding RMB
400 billion (US$ 60.3 billion) and AI-related industry gross output exceeding
RMB 5 trillion (US$ 754.0 billion); by 2030, China is likely to become the 
world’s “primary” AI innovation centre, with a core AI industry gross output
exceeding RMB 1 trillion (US$ 150.8 billion) and AI-related gross output
exceeding RMB 10 trillion (US$ 1.5 trillion). In other words, its three strategic
phases of AI development are: (a) catching up with the most advanced AI 
powers; (b) becoming a world leader in AI; and (c) achieving primacy in AI 
innovation. 
China has a limited talent pool of around 39,000 AI researchers, less than 
half the size of the US pool of over 78,000 researchers. With AI as a priority, 
the Chinese government has encouraged development of AI start-ups and
enhanced efforts to bring back researchers from abroad under its “Thousand 
Talents Programme” begun in 2008. The South China Morning Post reported 
on November 8, 2018, that the Beijing Institute of Technology, breaking new 
ground,has recruited 31 ‘patriotic’youngsters straight from high school to begin
training as the world’s youngest AI weapons scientists in a new AI weapons
development programme. The 27 boys and four girls, all aged 18 and under,
have been selected for the four-year “experimental programme for intelligent 
weapons systems” at the Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) from more 
than 5,000 candidates. BIT is one of China’s top weapons research institutes,
and the launch of the new programme underscores the importance China 
accords to the development of AI technology for military use. According to 
a BIT Professor, “These kids are all exceptionally bright, but being bright is not 
– 35 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
enough. We are looking for other qualities such as creative thinking,willingness
to fight, a persistence when facing challenges. A passion for developing new 
weapons is a must … and they must also be patriots.” Each student will be 
mentored by two senior weapons scientists, one from an academic background 
and the other from the defence industry. After completing a short programme
of course work in the first semester, the students will be asked to choose a 
speciality field, such as mechanical engineering, electronics or overall weapon
design. They will then be assigned to a relevant defence laboratory where they
will be able to develop their skills through hands-on experience. BIT launched 
the programme at the headquarters of Norinco, one of China’s biggest defence 
contractors, on October 28, 2018. After completing the four-year course, the 
students are expected to enrol in a PhD programme and become the next
leaders of China’s AI weapons programme.
At the same time, China began funding AI start-ups through
“Government Guidance Funds” (GGFs) set up by local governments and 
state-owned companies. In two years since 2016, the Chinese government 
has invested more than US$ 1 billion on domestic start-ups. The Hong
Kong-headquartered Sun Hung Kai Financial has forecast that the quantum
of funding flowing from GGFs is likely to eclipse China’s private Venture 
Capital (VC) investments. It cited as example that for the year 2016, GGFs 
set a total fund-raising target of RMB 3.3 trillion (US$ 500 billion) vs. a 
RMB 2.2 trillion (US$ 330 billion) total raised by private funds. A report 
said that in parallel with accelerating AI development, this would help tech
companies incorporate Party committees, thereby promoting the Party’s goals.
In the past few years, more than 35 tech companies, including Baidu and Sina,
have created company Party committees.
A Wuzhen Institute report said that between 2012 to 2016, Chinese AI 
firms received US$ 2.6 billion in investment funding. Another report from 
IT Juzi and Tencent Institute, however, offered a different estimation and 
said that Chinese AI companies received 33.18 per cent (US$ 9.6 billion) of
the world’s AI funding. Global funding received by Chinese AI start-ups in
2017, jumped up and they received 48 per cent of the total global funding.
The report assessed the growth in China’s AI scene over the past year alone 
as astronomical. Xinhua on December 9, 2018, quoted the latest report by 
– 36 – 
CHINA: PATH TO HI-TECHNOLOGY 
Bloomberg Intelligence (BI), which said that China’s core AI industry could
exceed US$ 145 billion by 2030 and with the AI-enabled industries, more 
than Yuan 10 trillion. The Bloomberg report titled “China’s Great Tech Leap
Forward”, said that China’s push to commercialise AI technologies, supported 
by the rollout of the world’s biggest 5G network, could position the country
as a global leader for technology and innovation. The report said, “China may 
overtake the US in global technology-patents share by 2025”. AI-related 
industries may exceed 6 per cent of China’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
by 2030. According to Tsinghua University, private funding for Chinese AIrelated companies in 2017 totalled US$ 27.7 billion, equivalent to 70 per cent
of global investments in the industry. Data showed that China’s cumulative 
venture-capital investments in AI start-ups had already caught up with the
United States by 2016.
Tsinghua University is the lead university for AI in China and is ranked
second in the world in the number of high-level papers published in the field
of AI in the past decade, indicating that it is among the world’s advanced 
institutes in AI basic theory and methods. An authoritative report released 
by it in 2018, revealed that it has established a number of AI research 
bases, most with military related research. Among these are the State Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems (Ც㜭ᢰᵟо㌫㔏”ഭᇦ
䟽⛩ᇎ傼ᇔ) established in 1990; the Intelligent Microsystems Ministry of 
Education Key Laboratory (Ც㜭ᗞ㌫㔏ᮉ㛢䜘䟽⛩ᇎ傼ᇔ) of the CMC
Science and Technology Commission National Defence Frontier Innovation 
Special Zone (ഭ䱢ࡽ⋯ࡋᯠ⢩४); the CMC Science and Technology
Commission’s High-End Laboratory for Military Intelligence (ߋһᲪ㜭儈
ㄟᇎ傼ᇔ); Tsinghua Brain and Intelligence Laboratory (␵ॾ㝁оᲪ㜭ᇎ傼
ᇔ) established in 2017; and an interdisciplinary research centre, the Tsinghua
University Intelligent Unmanned Systems Research Centre.
In the commercial AI ecosystem, the Chinese government actively picks 
winners in the AI space. For example, in November 2017, it designated
Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent, and iFlyTek to lead the development of national 
AI innovation platforms in self-driving cars, smart cities, computer vision
for medical diagnosis, and voice intelligence, respectively. Later, in August
29, the South China Morning Post disclosed that China has named Huawei 
– 37 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Technologies and Hikvision Digital Technology as new ‘national champions’
in AI.The two are the latest batch of ten companies tasked to spearhead efforts 
in that field, with the others including Xiaomi, JD.com, Qihoo 360, Megvii
and Yitu. 
Much of China’s research on AI is focussed on its military applications.
Chinese military experts refer to changing the PLA’s goal frominformationisation 
to intelligentisation.The predictive aspect of AI appears to be of special interest 
with its application in, what China euphemistically describes as, ‘stability 
maintenance’ to anticipate social unrest. The establishment of the Tsinghua
Brain and Intelligence Laboratory in 2017 confirms that research is underway 
on predicting the behaviour of military adversaries.
The US think-tank Jamestown Foundation reported that in early 2019,
PLA Senior Col Li Minghai, Director of the National Security Studies 
Institute at the National Defence University (NDU) and Deputy Secretary of
NDU’s Communist Party Committee, published a pair of articles that offered 
a new set of terms and theoretical ideas related to the incorporation and
operationalisation of AI by the PLA. Li Minghai introduced a new term: the 
“algorithm game” (suanfa boyi, ㇇⌅ঊᔸ), which was presented in the context 
of conflict between first-tier military forces in a dawning age of “intelligentized 
warfare” (zhinenghua zhanzheng, Ც㜭ॆᡈҹ). The author pointed out
that the terms have been used since 2017, including by Professor An Bo of 
Nanyang Engineering University, who discussed how AI and algorithmic 
game theory will allow the more efficient deployment of resources for a broad 
range of domestic security missions. Discussions of “intelligentized” warfare 
have also been used with increasing frequency by PLA writers in recent years,
suggesting a nascent effort to develop a doctrinal framework for how AI and 
game theory could be integrated into future military operations by the PLA.
This would connect to PLA ambitions to seek battlefield information and 
command superiority, as well as effectively control escalation in a future armed 
conflict. Separately, Adam Ni, China researcher from Macquarie University in
Sydney, said that China has set up two major research organisations focussed
on AI unmanned systems, and China’s pursuit of artificial intelligence for 
the PLA aims at leveraging the emerging technology to enhance national 
power. He added that the PLA Daily in November carried a description of a 
– 38 – 
CHINA: PATH TO HI-TECHNOLOGY 
swarm of drones, operated by a cloud “brain”, that could detect a target enemy
and automatically attack it. He said future “intelligent” wars will be fought
with smart weapons and systems, supported by AI and capable of analysing
situations, undertaking tasks and missions on their own. 
5G Communications Technology
The fifth generation of information and communications technology, or 5G,
is viewed in the West as the next big change after the industrial revolution.
According to a report issued by the Asia Studies Centre in the UK in May
this year, the fifth generation (5G) of wireless networks will deliver a profound 
change in latency, data speed and volume, allowing for new technologies
such as agricultural or delivery drones, self-driving vehicles, and other datadriven tech. The 5G equipment is complicated and will play a major part in 
the economic and national security of nations. Concerns about security arise 
because it is much faster than the 4G, with huge numbers of channels, and 
will link literally millions of pieces of equipment in the world. China’s Huawei 
has emerged as a leader in this sector with a presence in over 50 countries. It 
is presently establishing AI nodes in approximately 30 countries along the
Digital Belt and Road Initiative.
Two main considerations weighing with prospective buyers of 5G are
expense and national security. Additionally, there are very few providers
in the market. Ericsson and Nokia are the two European companies and
China’s Huawei is the other. South Korea with Samsung, and Taiwan and
Vietnam are about to ready their systems. However, the 5G equipment
supplied by Ericsson and Nokia costs twice as much as that of Huawei. 
Countries, therefore, have three choices: pay almost double the cost for
ensuring national security, especially since the European companies can
be expected to resist government pressure to tap communications; try and
upgrade their existing 4G system, which is feasible but will not give the
same speed and capabilities as 5G; and opt to continue with the present
system till they develop one indigenously or purchase a lower priced 5G
from South Korea,Taiwan or Vietnam. Countries like India that are unlikely
to need 5G, except for limited data and voice communications, for the next
3-4 years, can consider the third option. 
– 39 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Unlike the old 4G where antennae were on the periphery, away from
the core, the 5G network relies upon a complicated series of active advanced
Multiple-Input/Multiple-Output (MIMO) antennae closely integrated with
the hardware and software required for transmission and reception of radio
signals, and signal processing algorithms to support the execution of the entire
system.The antennae control the radiation pattern,gain,bandwidth,polarisation,
and frequency range and power across the network. The key to MIMO and
the ability to control multiple data streams using the same time and frequency
resource is the ‘antenna’. Whoever controls the antenna, controls the network. 
Experts say it is possible for the systems provider, like Huawei, for example, to
insert a ‘backdoor’ within the antennae and allow it to stay dormant till required.
It is very unlikely to be detected by even technically advanced and proficient
agencies. Worth noting is that certain antennae and microwave equipment
for Huawei’s 5G are produced by the China Electronics Technology Group
Corporation (CETC), a state-owned defence conglomerate.
A British “Risk Analysis of Huawei 5G” by Nicholas Weaver (April 17,
2019) states that Huawei uses, like much of the rest of the world, a complex
code, but written in an “unsafe” manner, using “unsafe” languages. He assessed 
that the scale and complexity make it impossible to analyse the code to look 
for new bugs, let alone efforts at sabotage. Sabotage itself can be very hard to 
detect even when one does have the source code, and even if discovered, it 
can also be almost indistinguishable from a “mistake.” A former senior officer 
of an American intelligence agency confided that Britain’s Government 
Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), after examining Huawei’s 5G 
network systems, had informed him that in addition to other concerns, the 
engineering of its system was poor.
While evaluating 5G network systems, India needs to give prime 
consideration to national security and the fact that the 5G system will expose
and render vulnerable the entire communications traffic, whether it is civil 
or military. Depending on the provider, the communications of officials,
senior leaders and politicians will be vulnerable to interception. China has 
an adversarial relationship and a 4,057-km-long border with India. Its 
comprehensive relationship, including intelligence sharing, with its “iron 
brother” Pakistan adds to India’s concerns. Huawei itself has very close 
– 40 – 
CHINA: PATH TO HI-TECHNOLOGY 
documented links with China’s military and security establishments and 
receives ‘preferential’ treatment. The ‘Civil-Military Fusion Programme’ has 
blurred even the thin line that might have existed. Its bonds with the CCP are 
evident from its founder Chairman Ren Zhengfei being a CCP member and 
Huawei having 12,000 CCP members among its employees and 300 CCP 
branches by 2007. Huawei’s Chairwoman from 1999 to 2018, was Sun Yafang,
who previously held senior posts in the Ministry of State Security as well as 
Chinese government research centres.
As China works towards developing AI for ‘predictive’battlefield capability
and upgrading the PLA from an “informationised’ force to an ‘intelligentised’
force, Huawei will play an important contributory role. Already the ingress 
by Chinese companies like Huawei and ZTE and products like PayPal,
Xiaomi and Tik-Tok into the Indian telecommunications market facilitates 
collection of huge volumes of personal data on Indians. China can well use 
this for building AI’s predictive capability for military or strategic use. It is 
clear that China’s Ministry of State Security (MSS) is interested in large data
sets of government officials for refining predictive capability. An example was
the MSS hacking into the US Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and
stealing more than 22 million records of US government officials. Using AI
and big data sets, China has begun to develop smart city technologies to track 
and shape the political behaviour of its population. 
As briefly illustrated, China has made rapid advances in future
advanced technologies. These, like AI and 5G networks, are mainly dualuse technologies. While China’s effort is driven primarily by domestic
security and strategic military considerations, commercial factors play an
important role. Noticeable is how China’s leadership has entrusted policymaking and implementation to experts, specialised universities and high
powered government bodies. It has also broken new ground, for example, by
recruiting candidates directly from schools for moulding them into weapons
experts. As China narrows the gap, its effort to reach the level of the world’s 
advanced technology powers has met obstacles. The US trade war has
specifically targeted China’s technology sector, or ‘Made in China-2025’ 
programme. China which has been dependent on four foreign companies
for its supply of graphic semi-conductors and laser micro-chips vital for AI 
– 41 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and 5G, is now scrambling to develop its own capability. Tighter controls by
the West on these supply chains will hamper China’s efforts which can mean 
delays in meeting target deadlines. 
References 
1.	 “Tsinghua’s Approach to Military - Civil Fusion in AI”, May 2018 (in
Chinese).
2.	 Jayadeva Ranade, “China: Emerging Cyber Power” in China Unveiled: 
Insights into Chinese Strategic Thinking (2013).
3.	 Bob Seely MP, Dr Peter Varnish OBE, Dr John Hemmings, “Defending
our Data: Huawei, 5G and the Five Eyes”, Asia Studies Centre, Henry
Jackson Society, May 2019.
4.	 Nicholas Weaver and forward by Sir Richard Deerlove, former Head of 
SIS, “Risk Analysis of Huawei 5G”, April 2019. 
5.	 Guancha.cn military affairs, September 22, 2017. 
(This article was published as a book chapter for Vivekanand India Foundation, New Delhi, 
December 2019, and as an article by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
October 28, 2019. 
– 42 – 
6. China’s Maritime Challenge in 
the Indo-Pacific 
Overview 
With the status quo under challenge and competition for strategic space 
intensifying, especially among the major regional powers in the Indo-Pacific,
the region has seen an increase in tensions. China’s ‘rise’has fuelled its ambition 
to become a global power. The perceived decline of the US, its reduced 
interest in the region and its reluctance to back even treaty allies like Japan 
and the Philippines, has encouraged China and exacerbated the situation.
Central to China’s ambition to become the preeminent regional power are 
maritime dominance and reunification with Taiwan. China has so far moved 
with prudence in its effort to advance its maritime territorial claims and held 
back from asserting itself in the East Sea to avoid antagonising Japan, but 
it has moved with greater assertion in the South China Sea—including by
ignoring the decision of the Permanent Court of Arbitration—where it has 
incrementally acquired a dominant position. It has shown little hesitation in 
clashing with the Philippines or Vietnam. While it has not yet declared the 
South China Sea as a “core national interest”, it depicts the area as part of its 
sovereign territory in official maps, and the People’s Liberation Army Navy 
(PLAN) has vowed in its recruitment ‘anthem’ to recover all the three million 
square kilometres of the South China Sea that Beijing claims. At the same 
time, China is working towards realising the goal of extending its ‘reach’ across 
the Indian Ocean and the ‘far seas’. 
PLAN: The Rise of a Global Naval Power 
The 19th Party Congress held in Beijing from October 17–24, 2017, reiterated 
China’s aspiration to become a global maritime power and stressed that by 
2050, the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) will be a “world class force”. By 
then, the PLAN was already projecting power and had been maintaining a 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
sustained presence in the Indian Ocean, with warships and a submarine sailing
in waters off the Gulf of Aden for anti-piracy operations. By 2015-16, all 
captains of PLAN vessels had familiarised themselves with the Indian Ocean 
by completing a tour of duty there. Since 2015, the PLAN has been sailing in
the Baltic and Bering Seas, South China Sea, East Sea, Indian Ocean and the 
Mediterranean Sea and calling on ports in Europe and the African continent.
Establishing a substantive near permanent presence in the Indian Ocean is a 
major Chinese objective and China seems well on the way to achieving this.
China has begun strengthening its Navy for larger tasks.
In fact, months before the 19th Party Congress in January 2017, Chinese 
President and Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC) Xi
Jinping, for the first time ever, appointed a PLAN officer to head the important 
PLA Southern Theatre Command, which exercises operational jurisdiction 
over the South China Sea and Indian Ocean. It is among the more important 
commands and exercises jurisdiction over China’s first, and so far only, overseas 
base of Djibouti, and at least two aircraft carriers have already been earmarked 
for this Command. The appointment indicates that China’s leadership felt
the PLA had acquired sufficient competence in Integrated Joint Operations
(IJ0), to which it had given priority since 2007. PLAN Vice Admiral Yuan 
Yunbai a graduate of the PLAN Qingdao Submarine Academy and the first
Navy officer to be appointed a Theatre Commander, is familiar with the Gulf 
of Aden, Indian Ocean and the PLAN’s North Sea Fleet. Interestingly, Vice 
Admiral Yuan Yunbai had, at the Shangri La Dialogue in 2015, observed that 
the “South China Sea, as the name indicates, is an area that belongs to China.
And the sea, from the Han dynasty a long time ago, is where the Chinese 
people have been working and producing from the sea”.
As part of its plans to acquire blue sea capability and meet its obligation
of ensuring the security of Chinese interests, investments and personnel in 
any part of the world, a continuing consideration for the PLAN has been 
acquiring bases for its global operations. Chinese Navy strategists have 
identified Karachi and Gwadar as a “base” and “logistics base” respectively,
and Chinese warships and submarines, including a nuclear submarine, have 
already paid visits there. Recent reports claim that China has shown interest 
in the port of Jiwani, also in Pakistan. A study of July 2017 reported that 
– 44 – 
CHINA’S MARITIME CHALLENGE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC 
China had doubled investments in acquiring overseas bases in 2016-17 to 
US$ 20 billion. Chinese companies have announced plans to buy or invest in 
nine overseas ports with discussions underway for several other ports. Some of 
the planned investments are: Melaka Gateway US$ 7.2 billion; Kuala Linggi
Port US$ 2.84 billion; Penang Port US$ 1.4 billion; Kuentan Port US$ 177 
million; and investments are planned in Indonesia’s Kalibaru project to expand
Tanjung Priok, and in Arkhangelsk (Russia), Klaipeda (Lithuania), Kirkenes 
(Norway) and two ports in Iceland.
While subsequent to the 19th Party Congress there has been a noticeable 
increase in reporting on developments relating to the PLAN and China’s
assertions of sovereignty over the South China Sea, the strengthening of the
PLAN has been underway for years. Reports in the Chinese official media 
and official and ‘informed’ blog sites reveal the rapid progress being made and
the focus on building the PLAN’s power projection capability. China’s stated 
objective is to have 350 surface warships and 100 submarines by 2030. China 
is, by all accounts, well on the way to this. 
PLAN: Current Status of Equipment
By 2000, China had built 19 large surface combatants and 63 small surface 
combatants like frigates and corvettes. The speed of construction has been 
stepped up, and in 2016 alone, the PLAN commissioned 18 warships
including destroyers, corvettes and guided missile frigates. In November 2017,
the PLAN commissioned new Type 056/056A corvettes. Described as “light
missile frigates”, the PLAN already has 37 of the Type 056/056A Jiangduo 
class corvettes and wants to build a fleet of 60 corvettes, with one new ship to 
be launched every three weeks. In 2017, the PLAN commissioned 7 Jiangduo 
class corvettes, with four to be inducted in December 2017 and January 2018.
Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) capability is a priority for the PLAN.
At present, China has six large naval vessels shipyards, namely, Dalian 
shipyard, Huludao shipyard, Jiangnan shipyard, Zhonghua dockyard,
Huangpu dockyard and Wuchang dockyard. Among these, Dalian shipyard 
and Jiangnan shipyard are the main players and are held up as models of
China’s construction abilities. Jiangnan shipyard is going to finish construction 
work of 10 warships of four different kinds. Dalian shipyard is also going to 
– 45 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
complete the construction of eight warships of three different kinds. These 
two shipbuilding groups are mainly responsible for construction of the 
Navy’s aircraft carrier, guided missile destroyer, Air-Independent Propulsion
(AIP) powered submarine, landing craft, etc. These two shipyards have also 
undertaken the task of constructing 054A type and 056type corvettes, which 
will be used in coastal defence and aircraft carrier formation. Jiangnan shipyard 
is going to build the 039B type AIP powered submarine, which has been 
developed after years of research.
Underlining its determination to continue reclaiming land and building
‘islands’ in the South China Sea to ‘recover’ sovereignty, China’s military
media publicised the launch at Jiangsu shipyard on November 3, 2017, of the 
Tiankun, described as “the biggest dredger in Asia”. The launch was timed 
for the eve of US President Trump’s visit. The Marine Design and Research 
Centre in Shanghai, which built the Tiankun, describes it as “a magical island 
maker”. 
Supplements to PLAN: Aviation
A very important part of China’s naval ambition is aircraft carriers, which 
have been described as essential to China’s status as a major global power.
Their construction has been given national priority and work has begun on
China’s fourth aircraft carrier which it hopes to operationalise by 2024. It has 
been described as the largest of the aircraft carriers and is likely to have the 
latest electro-magnetic launcher system for carrier-based aircraft. Meanwhile,
the indigenously built type 001A aircraft carrier is likely to commence sea 
trials in early 2018. To accelerate construction of aircraft carriers, China has 
constituted a contingent of 5,000 personnel drawn from different shipyards 
with experience in building aircraft carriers.
To enhance its ‘far seas’ operations capability, the PLAN is developing
its aviation arm. Chinese Navy strategists have justified this on the ground 
that training required for aircraft carrier pilots is different from that for 
land-based pilots. At the same time, it is observed that the PLA Air Force 
(PLAAF) and PLA Army (PLAA) pilots are carrying out training exercises 
with PLAN pilots. As part of the effort to strengthen its aviation arm, the 
PLAN established the Naval Aeronautical University in 2017. In its first year 
– 46 – 
CHINA’S MARITIME CHALLENGE IN THE INDO-PACIFIC 
it recruited 450 pilots and commenced their first round of training on the JL10 H Navy trainer jets. This year, it is planned to recruit another 400 pilots.
The PLAN estimates that it will have 40 jets aboard each aircraft carrier and 
should have at least two pilots for each aircraft.
After the PLAAF, the PLAN Aviation forces have also recently received 
the naval retrofit of the H-6KH bomber aircraft, photographs of which 
appeared on the internet. The H6KH bomber aircraft is said to be a new type
of bomber developed for the PLAN Aviation force. Reports suggest that it 
may already be in active service. The H6KH bomber will significantly increase 
the PLAN’s sea combat capability.
There are clear indications that with this build-up in capacity, the PLAN 
is preparing for operations in distant seas. The PLAN’s destroyer Haikou, 
guided missile corvette Yueyang and comprehensive supply ship Qinghai, for 
the first time conducted a 4-day combat training in the Gulf of Guinea, which 
the PLA Navy described as a test for the Navy’s long-term missions overseas 
and to examine its ability in the “distant, strange battlefield environment”.
China’s response to the crisis in Maldives, including cautioning India against
unilateral action, when viewed with the official statement that a 4-ship flotilla
of “warships entered the East Indian Ocean at the time when the situation in 
Maldives was tense, follow up of the situation was needed” is a pointer. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on May 
10, 2018.) 
– 47 – 
7. Belt and Road Initiative and its 
Future Implications 
When we look at the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), it is important to look 
at it from a broader perspective. Over the last decade or so, there has been a 
flux in global geopolitics. The older established powers are being challenged 
by other emerging centres of power, especially in Asia. It is in this context that 
we have to look at the BRI, the evolution of which coincides with this flux. In 
addition, there is an attempt by China to reshape the world order as we know 
it. 
Since 2008, China has made successive bids to place itself on par with 
the US or to at least be recognised as its equal. In the course of time, China 
wants to gradually surpass the US in the exercise of global power. For this, it 
came up with a new formulation: ‘a new type of big power relations’, which 
envisaged precisely that the US and China would be joint arbitrators on global 
issues. However, the US has declined to give China that status. At the 19th 
Party Congress in October 2017, Xi Jinping spelt out China’s ambitions very
clearly. He said that by 2049—that is the anniversary of the founding of the 
People’s Republic of China (PRC)—“China will be a major world power 
with pioneering global influence”. The term “world power with pioneering 
global influence” implies that China will have the influence to create or 
reshape international organisations like the UN, World Bank, World Trade 
Organisation (WTO), etc. More recently on April 3, Yan Xuetong, a wellknown Chinese scholar and strategist who is close to Xi Jinping, expressed 
confidence in China’s rise by saying he hoped “that the US and China will 
work together to provide progressive leadership to the world”.
There are major implications for the region too. China’s rise has 
been assertive, and some would even say aggressive, as evidenced by
its activities in the South China Sea (SCS), air violations over Japan,
with Taiwan, and along the borders with India. With the BRI, China is
effectively squeezing the strategic space of its neighbours and also bending 
 
BELT AND ROAD INITIATIVE AND ITS FUTURE IMPLICATIONS 
international borders. The China–Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC)
brings this out clearly. China has shed its decades-long ambiguity over
PoK (Pakistan occupied Kashmir), Gilgit and Baltistan and has now
openly backed Pakistan’s claims. To protect Chinese investments, it has
asked Pakistan to further integrate these regions into the federal structure
of Pakistan and the Pakistan government is carrying out elections in these
areas. With the flow of Chinese economic, diplomatic and military power
into Pakistan, we can see the military implications of the CPEC.
The Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Corridor (BCIM) is the last
leg of the BRI and is similarly not acceptable to India. Both Myanmar,
and Bangladesh don’t really manufacture any goods that India needs and it 
is Chinese goods and people that will come through the BCIM and flood
the northeast. More Chinese products and immigrants will flow into the
sensitive and vulnerable areas, like our northeast, where our businessmen 
already have problems transporting goods to the region, and we have problems 
with identification of the population. The problem is magnified with China 
coveting Arunachal Pradesh.
The BRI is a geostrategic economic initiative, which will expand China’s
economic, diplomatic, and military power across the globe. It has already
begun to do so regionally, which fits into its declared ambition of achieving
the ‘China Dream’, which includes the ‘rejuvenation of the great Chinese 
nation’ by 2021 which is the centenary of the Chinese Communist Party and
includes the ‘recovery’ of territories said to have been lost by the imposition of
unequal treaties by foreign powers.
What actually does the BRI imply? It covers 55 per cent of the world
Gross National Product (GNP), 70 per cent of the total population, and
75 per cent of the world’s known energy reserves. I define it simply, “The
US$ 1.4 trillion BRI is to connect production centres in China with
natural resources centres and markets around the world over a Chinabuilt communications artery. It has rail, road, sea, aerospace and cyber
components” and is multi-dimensional. The BRI will put to use China’s 
surplus manpower, idling financial resources, and the unused infrastructure
and technological capabilities of China’s huge State-owned Enterprises
(SoEs). The best part is that the recipient countries will be paying for it 
– 49 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
since the projects are mostly financed by loans, with very few grants except
in cases like Gwadar! 
In this context, worth noting is the fact that the SoEs have gained 28 per
cent in profitability since 2014. A European Union (EU) study showed that 
89 per cent of the contracts awarded under the BRI are to Chinese SoEs.
The rates of interest charged by Chinese banks are around 7 per cent, with 
reportedly additional hidden costs.
The BRI, incidentally, is a collection of projects, with some begun almost
10 years before 2013, that have been stitched together and put under this
umbrella. It is a China-conceived and China-led project. To underscore the 
point, last year China’s Supreme Court set up special BRI courts in China 
where all matters relating to the BRI and all arbitration relating to the BRI 
are to be decided. These are in Beijing, Xi’an, and Shenzhen.
Over the past 18 months, there has been a burgeoning pushback to
the BRI. India’s refusal to join the initiative, which lacks transparency
and violates its territorial integrity and sovereignty, has contributed to
the difficulties of the BRI. Many countries have begun reviewing the BRI
projects following India’s assertion that it is a ‘debt trap’, and the example
of Hambantota in Sri Lanka. These include China’s “iron brother” Pakistan, 
who hosts the BRI flagship of the CPEC. Pakistan is reviewing 50 per cent
of the BRI projects, but has already given Gwadar to China on a 50-year 
lease. There are also conflicting figures of China’s actual investment in the
CPEC, with Pakistan mentioning a figure of US$ 19 billion. Thailand and
Malaysia are also reviewing the BRI projects, and Malaysian Prime Minister
Mahathir accused China of being a new imperialist power soon after his
meeting with the Chinese Premier and has successfully brought down the
cost of a BRI rail project by 30 per cent, showing the high margins in costs.
But the BRI was incorporated into China’s Constitution at the 19th Party
Congress and Xi Jinping is personally backing the project, thereby putting
the state’s might behind the BRI. Also, Premier Li Keqiang, in his report
to the second session of the 13th National People’s Congress (NPC), which
concluded on March 15, said that China “continues to have a window of 
strategic opportunity”, implying that it will continue to push ahead with the
BRI despite the obstacles that it faces. 
– 50 – 
BELT AND ROAD INITIATIVE AND ITS FUTURE IMPLICATIONS 
Closely associated with the BRI and to which little attention is paid is
the acceleration in build-up of the muscle power, or armed forces, of China 
along with its economic and diplomatic power. The PLA Navy (PLAN), the 
second largest Navy in the world today, which is celebrating its 70th founding
anniversary in Qingdao today, plans to have five aircraft carriers and is rapidly
building a number of warships. By 2030 or 2035, China intends to have a Navy
which has 350 surface warships and 100 submarines. That’s a very large Navy.
China has also started building or upgrading 75 ports around the world along
with coastal infrastructure. Its Ministry of Transportation in May claimed 
that “they are building 42 ports in 34 countries”. Many of these will be bases
or logistics bases. Chinese military literature already mentions Gwadar as 
a “logistics naval base”, and Karachi as “a regular Navy base”. China clearly
intends to back its commercial and diplomatic initiatives with military muscle.
The digital BRI also expands China’s cyber capabilities with digital
espionage hubs detected in some countries on the BRI.
Closer home, the CPEC highlights the military overtones of the BRI.
The secure fibre optic cable that has been laid from Kashgar, namely the
headquarters of the South Xinjiang Military District which is just north 
of and across Ladakh, connects with the Pakistan General Headquarters 
(GHQ) in Rawalpindi, bypassing the political capital of Islamabad. And there 
are a number of PLA personnel deployed in Pakistan, especially in Gwadar. 
Chinese security companies are now operating in Pakistan as much as they are 
operating in Africa. There is a clear expanding Chinese military presence in 
Pakistan and these are factors India has to contend with. 
But it’s not all smooth sailing and the pushback to the BRI will grow
unless the Chinese are able to fund it in a manner that is much more 
attractive and transparent. But China’s economy is slowing down and is in
difficulty, as suggested by the Chinese banks’ meeting in last April when
they said that they would have to look for diverse sources of funding—
indicating that China does not have the capacity or willingness to pump
huge sums into the BRI. China’s Exim Bank, in fact, said on April 22 that
it has Yuan 1 trillion stuck in outstanding loans which it has not been able
to recover. Also the areas through which the BRI will pass such as Pakistan,
Turkey and the Central Asian Republics are troubled areas. There is also 
– 51 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
growing resentment due to the huge influx of Chinese people. These issues
are further compounded by the Chinese advancing formulas like ‘creating 
a community of common destiny’ and suggesting it and their system as an
alternative to the world’s democracies. Given the direction the situation 
inside China is moving in and the ‘social credit management system’ that 
seeks to regulate the actions and possibly even thoughts of people, all this
is troubling for those asked to subscribe to it. There are hidden worries for
virtually all countries and, as far as India is concerned, there are no tangible
benefits in opting for the project. 
(Text of talk by Mr Jayadeva Ranade at a seminar on “The Implications and Future of the Belt 
and Road Initiative’” at India International Centre (IIC) on April 23, 2019.) 
– 52 – 
 
 
8. China’s 19th Party Congress: New Leaders 
to Steer China to the China Dream 
The week long (October 18-24, 2017) 19th Congress of the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP), which was held in Beijing, concluded as anticipated with Xi
Jinping emerging considerably stronger. His contribution to Chinese Communist
ideology was recognised and unanimously approved for incorporation into
the Party Constitution as the “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese
Characteristics for a New Era”. He is the first CCP leader to have his contribution, 
attached to his name, enshrined in the Party Constitution while still alive. This
places it next in heft to those of Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, especially with
the Chinese media already having begun to headline it as “Xi Jinping Thought”!
The approval by the 19th Party Congress to the appointment of many 
Xi Jinping loyalists, who now constitute the majority of the membership of 
the Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC), Politburo (PB), CCP Central 
Committee’s (CC’s) Secretariat and Central Military Commission (CMC),
underscores the unmistakable—and anticipated—enhancement of Xi 
Jinping’s authority and influence. Pertinent in this context are the revelations 
by China’s official media in the weeks before the 19th Party Congress of the 
successes achieved by the campaign against corruption and, on the sidelines of 
the Congress on October 20, by Liu Shiyu, Chairman of the China Securities 
Regulatory Commission, who said that “Xi Jinping had saved socialism 
by bringing down high-ranking officials who intended to “usurp the Party 
leadership and seize state power” and described Xi Jinping as a saviour of the 
Communist Party. Liu Shiyu has since been promoted to the CCP CC! 
Interesting are the affiliations of the new leaders appointed to the PBSC,
whose number remains at seven. The composition of the new PBSC shows 
that while Xi Jinping has followed the Party’s informal rules and conventions 
regarding the retirement age of senior echelon cadres, he has avoided inducting 
younger cadres who could be potential successors in the PBSC. The field 
for advancement to the next PBSC and as successors to Xi Jinping and Li 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Keqiang have, therefore, been left wide open for the younger cadres now in the 
PB.The field is open too for Xi Jinping to continue in office as, which some of 
his acolytes have been saying since 2013, China enters a new thirty-year era 
like those of Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping earlier! 
Apart from the seven PBSC members,among the remaining 17 PB members
also, Xi Jinping has a clear majority. At least 12 of them are his long-time loyalists
not including the two Vice Chairmen of the Central Military Commission (CMC)
who are also his very close and long-time associates. Some of the PB members are
poised to take over as heads of Central Party organisations.They all owe their rise
to him. Equally important is the CCP CC Secretariat, which has in the past five
years under Xi Jinping become a powerful body. It reports directly to Xi Jinping.
Xi Jinping has packed the important new 7- member CCP CC Secretariat with
loyalists and Wang Huning is its seniormost member.The previous 18th CCP CC
Secretariat was headed by Liu Yunshan who also,like Wang Huning is now,was in
charge of ideology, the propaganda apparatus and Party organisation.Three of the
Secretariat’s members are persons with a background in security or the military,
namely, Yang Xiaodu, Guo Shengkun and Huang Kunming. The indication is
that Party controls on these sectors will continue to become progressively tougher.
At least two members of the new CCP CC Secretariat have a background
in Tibet affairs. In addition to Wang Huning, who has in the past been a
member of Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) delegations to the National 
People’s Congress (NPC), these are Yang Xiaodu, a ‘sent down youth in the 
Cultural Revolution’ and till recently Minister of Supervision who served in
the TAR from 1976-2001, and Guo Shengkun who as the Minister of Public
Security (MPS) attended meetings of the Leading Small Work Group on Tibet.
Huang Kunming, another member of the Secretariat has served in the People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA).
As anticipated, TAR Party Secretary Wu Yingjie has been promoted to the
new 19th CC as a full member.In addition,this time there are two ethnic Tibetans, 
Qi Zhala and Luosang Jiangcun, as full members of the CC, or one more than
in the previous CC. Sun Chunlan who was head of the CCP CC United Front
Work Department and handling Tibet affairs, continues as the solitary woman in
the PB despite being 67 years old, which actually puts her in the retirement zone.
Interestingly, Zhang Qingli, who was born in 1951 and earned a reputation as a 
– 54 – 
CHINA’S 19TH PARTY CONGRESS: NEW LEADERS TO STEER CHINA TO THE CHINA DREAM 
hardline TAR Party Secretary for his derogatory comments about the Dalai Lama,
continues as a full member of the 19th CC. Zhang Yijiong, present Executive
Deputy Head of the United Front Work Department (UFWD) of the CCP, and
Vice Minister who on the sidelines of the 19th Party Congress, outlined China’s 
new strong policy towards the Dalai Lama, has been promoted from alternate
member of the 18th CC to full member of the 19th CC. Both of them will have 
a strong say in the Tibet policy.
The new CMC consists of military officials who are all solid supporters of 
Xi Jinping.The composition and size of the new Central Military Commission
(CMC) has also changed. For the present, it comprises only four members 
and does not include the heads of the different services like the PLA Air 
Force (PLAAF), PLA Navy (PLAN), etc. The two CMC Vice Chairmen,
former PLAAF Commander Xu Qiliang and PLA Gen Zhang Youxia, are 
both ‘princelings’ with a long-time association with Xi Jinping.The new CMC 
Vice Chairman, Zhang Youxia’s father Zhang Zongxun fought alongside Xi
Jinping’s father and they were called ‘partners in blood’. Zhang Youxia had 
fought in the Sino-Vietnam War in 1979.
The presence of Xu Qiliang, Zhang Youxia and PLA Rocket Force
Commander Wei Fenghe in the CMC point to an emphasis on the development
and acquisition of modern, advanced defence technology. The induction of Gen
Li Zuocheng, head of the Joint Staff Department under the CMC, and Lt. Gen 
Zhang Shengmin, Secretary of the PLA Discipline Inspection Commission,
indicate that Xi Jinping will maintain the stress on ‘clean’ and corruption free
armed forces. Zhang Shengmin, incidentally, previously served in the 52th, 55th
and 56th Bases of the Second Artillery in the Lanzhou Military Region and was
Political Commissar of the Second Artillery Command College between 2012
and 2013. Gen Miao Hua as head of the Political Work Department under the
CMC will further Xi Jinping’s agenda of expanding Party control and supervision 
over China’s armed forces, ensuring that the personnel are ‘red and expert’. 
The new appointments in the CCP’s top bodies will allow Xi Jinping to
pursue his ambitious agenda with little restraint. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on October 
25, 2017.) 
– 55 – 
9. Initial Assessment of Xi Jinping’s Work 
Report at 19th Party Congress 
The crucial 19th Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) opened in
Beijing on October 18, 2017, amidst stringent security restrictions in Beijing and
other major cities in China. Nearly 1,000 foreign reporters from 130 countries
were reported to be covering the Congress.The Congress was preceded by other
important meetings, namely the 7th and last Plenum of the 18th CCP Central
Committee (CC), and of the Party’s powerful anti-corruption body, the Central
Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC) chaired by Xi Jinping’s close 
associate and Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) member, Wang Qishan.
CCP CC General Secretary Xi Jinping, who holds 14 formal positions—
more than any other CCP leader so far—is poised to emerge stronger from 
this Congress. His sustained anti-corruption campaign has eliminated 
opposition in the Party and military, and drastically reduced the influence 
wielded by his predecessor once removed, Jiang Zemin. In September 2017,
China’s official media publicised that more than 176 CCP cadres equivalent to 
the rank of central Vice Minister and above had been dismissed and arrested 
for corruption and that more than 14,000 officers of the People’s Liberation 
Army (PLA) had been similarly dismissed, including more than 86 officers of 
and above the rank of Major General.
Just weeks before the Congress, Xi Jinping publicly demonstrated his 
authority by arresting two top Generals, appointing 20 Generals to command 
thirteen new Group Armies and promoting close associates to head the PLA 
Army (ground forces) and PLA Air Force. In a rare move, the names of 
thirteen delegates selected by Chongqing municipality were deleted, reducing 
the total number of delegates to 2,287. Politburo member and Chongqing 
Party Secretary Sun Zhengcai, viewed as a likely candidate for the PBSC,
was also suddenly dismissed on charges of graft. He had been admonished in 
February for not doing enough to eliminate the influence of the imprisoned 
former Politburo (PB) member Bo Xilai. 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF XI JINPING’S WORK REPORT AT 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
Xi Jinping has also been projecting himself since November 2012. The 
People’s Daily, for example, during Jiang Zemin’s tenure, used to publish 
approximately 3,000 stories per year mentioning him, and during Hu Jintao’s 
term, it published 2,000 each year mentioning Hu Jintao. In stark contrast, the 
People’s Daily already publishes 5,000 stories each year mentioning Xi Jinping.
An estimated 34 PLA officers, from the 41 who are members of the CCP 
CC, and nearly 200 of the 376 members of the CC will be replaced, making
it the highest turnover since the 9th Party Congress in 1969 and providing
Xi Jinping an unprecedented opportunity to induct persons of his choice. Xi 
Jinping has paved the way for the induction of many loyalists or individuals
who would owe their allegiance to him by promoting, or positioning, them 
in key slots in the PLA and Party apparatus. Important will be how many
people of his choice he is able to bring into the PB and PBSC. If Xi Jinping
does acquire full control of the PB and PBSC, he will be free of any restraints 
in pursuing realisation of the “Two Hundreds” namely, the ‘China Dream’ (by
2021 which marks the CCP’s centenary) and the Belt and Road Initiative 
(BRI), and making China an advanced developed nation [by 2049, or the 
hundredth year of the founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC)].
It could additionally leave open the possibility of him extending his term till 
nearly 2049.
CCP CC General Secretary Xi Jinping took three and a half hours— 
twice the time taken by Hu Jintao at the 18th Party Congress in November 
2012—to read the 32,000-character, 10-section Work Report to the 2,280 
delegates representing 89 million CCP members. The emphasis on Party
building, the Party’s role, and the notion that “ideology determines culture”
were predominant. Terms like “four cardinal principles” and “let a hundred 
flowers bloom and let a hundred schools of thought contend” prevailed. There 
was specific reference to the “evolution of principle contradiction” which was 
subsequently explained in a separate Xinhua despatch.There was a new special
section devoted to ecology and the environment.
The delegates included 253 from the PLA and 50 from the People’s 
Armed Police Force (PAPF), with 186 from central government agencies, 109 
from departments directly under the CCP CC, 53 from central State owned 
Enterprises (SoEs), and 44 from the financial sector. There were 551 women 
– 57 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and 264 ethnic minorities delegates. All the delegates were elected through a
competitive process except in the Xinjiang and Tibet Autonomous Regions.
Xi Jinping was watched by 74 senior veteran Party cadres who attended.
These veteran cadres remain very influential but do not have voting rights.
Included among them were 102-year-old Song Ping, who was the most senior,
and Xi Jinping’s immediate predecessors Hu Jintao and Jiang Zemin who are 
75 and 91 years old respectively. Also attending were former Premiers Wen 
Jiabao and Zhu Rongji; former Chinese Vice President Zeng Qinghong; and 
former Politburo Standing Committee members Li Ruihuan and Jia Qinglin.
The 32,000-character Work Report outlined a confident, bold two-stage
plan for goals to be achieved by China by 2050. Xi Jinping, for the first time 
set timelines and declared that by the end of the first phase (2020-35) China
will be an innovative, technologically advanced, large, middle-income country
ranking among the top nations in the world. By completion of the second 
stage (2035-50), China should be a nation with “pioneering global influence”.
Implicit in this is that China will rival or surpass the US in strength and be 
proactive in international affairs to promote its interests. The Work Report 
outlined the leadership’s plans for China over the next five years and though
essentially its focus is on domestic issues, it did, as per past practice, touch 
on international affairs. The Party, China and Army were mentioned often,
along with a specific reference to the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Less 
mentioned were the economy, reform and development.
Xi Jinping described the situation at home and abroad as “undergoing 
profound and complex changes”, but added that “China’s development is still
an important strategic opportunity, the prospects are bright” though “the 
challenge is also very serious”. He advised all Party members to take a longterm perspective and be vigilant.
There was emphasis on the PLA with the term ‘Army’ mentioned more 
than double the number of times than in the Work Reports presented at 
the 17th and 18th Congresses. It was mentioned 86 times in Xi Jinping’s
Work Report to the 19th Party Congress and 49 and 54 times in the Work
Reports presented at the 18th and 17th Party Congresses respectively. Xi 
Jinping announced that the Army’s focus will be on realisation of the ‘Chinese 
Dream’ for which it must develop “a new military strategy under the new 
– 58 – 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF XI JINPING’S WORK REPORT AT 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
situation”. National defence and military modernisation will be promoted.
Clarifying that by 2020, mechanisation will be basically achieved and that 
the modernisation of national defence and armed forces should be basically
completed by 2035, Xi Jinping said that “IT has come a long way and strategic 
capabilities have seen a big improvement.” He underscored technology as the
PLA’s “core combat capability”. Xi Jinping asserted that the goal is to make
the PLA a “world class force” that “can fight and win” by 2050. This timeline 
coincides with the realisation of the BRI and China becoming a nation with
“pioneering global influence”. Xi Jinping pointedly described the PLA as a 
“People’s Army”.
The section on foreign policy did not name any country. It contained a 
reference to the ‘Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence’. Xi Jinping called 
“on all peoples to work together to build a human destiny, build lasting peace,
universal security, common prosperity, open tolerance, a clean and beautiful 
world”. He asked countries to “respect each other, have mutual consultation,
and resolutely abandon the Cold War mentality and power politics” and said 
it is necessary to “follow a new road of state-to-state engagement without
forming any alliances”. He said,“We must insist on resolving disputes through
dialogue, resolving differences through consultation, coping with traditional
and non-traditional security threats, and opposing all forms of terrorism”. He 
stressed that “China firmly pursues an independent foreign policy of peace, 
respects the rights of all peoples to choose their own path of development,
upholds international fairness and justice, opposes the imposition of their will
on others, opposes interference in the internal affairs of other countries and 
opposes strong bullying”.
Appearing to take note of the criticism prompted by the huge debt
burden on Sri Lanka because of the BRI and criticism in Pakistan, he said, 
“China will never sacrifice the interests of other countries at the expense of
the development of their own, and never give up their legitimate rights and
interests... no one wants to let China damage their own interests and have 
a bitter fruit”. He assured that “China pursues a defensive national defense 
policy. China’s development does not pose a threat to any country. China, no 
matter what degree of development it follows, will never seek hegemony, never 
engage in expansion”. 
– 59 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
The references to Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan were uncompromising
with a strong suggestion of limits imposed on the three. With regard to 
Taiwan, Xi Jinping said, “We have the resolve, the confidence and the ability
to defeat separatist attempts for ‘Taiwan independence’ in any form. We will 
never allow anyone, any organisation or any political party, at any time or in
any form, to separate any part of Chinese territory from China”. He asserted 
that the CCP “stands firm in safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity, and will never allow the historical tragedy of national division to 
repeat itself ”. Referring to Hong Kong and Macau, he said the policy of “one 
country, two systems” has proved to be the best institutional guarantee for
the long-term prosperity and stability of Hong Kong and Macao after their 
return. 
Xi Jinping’s imprimatur on the Work Report was clearly visible. It 
gave a prominent and leading role to the Party in every sphere. Xi Jinping
unambiguously declared that China would not have made the progress it had 
without the leadership of the CCP. He claimed that “historic shifts” had been 
made in the cause of the Communist Party of China and the country in the
past five years. There was pronounced emphasis in the Work Report on “the 
Party exercising leadership over all areas of endeavour in every part of the 
country”, clearly indicating that Party controls will be expanded and ideology
will remain predominant. Xi Jinping emphasised that “sweeping efforts” 
had been made to “strengthen Party leadership and Party building” while 
dismissing any notion of copying “Western style democracy”. There were 331 
references to the ‘Party’ in this Work Report, many more than in the Work
Reports at the past eight Congresses. The word ‘Party’ figured 235 and 234 
times in the Work Reports presented at the 18th and 17th Party Congresses.
A significant achievement for Xi Jinping was inclusion of the “Thought
on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era”, already being
headlined throughout the Chinese media as “Xi Jinping’s Thought” and which 
will be incorporated by an amendment in the Party Constitution. An entire 
section of the Work Report defined this ‘thought’. This includes: “The Party’s 
goal of building a strong military in the new era is to build the people’s forces 
into world class forces that obey the Party’s command, can fight and win,
and maintain excellent conduct”; “major country diplomacy aims to foster 
– 60 – 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF XI JINPING’S WORK REPORT AT 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
a new type of international relations and build a community with a shared 
future”; and the “defining feature of socialism with Chinese characteristics is 
the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party”. These imply a global role 
for the CCP. 
Reading the report, Xi Jinping said the CCP “has given shape to the
Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era” which 
“builds on and further enriches Marxism-Leninism, Mao Zedong Thought,
Deng Xiaoping Theory, the Theory of Three Represents, and the Scientific 
Outlook on Development.” Saying, “It represents the latest achievement in 
adapting Marxism to the Chinese context”, Xi Jinping called it a long-term
“guide to action” which the Party must adhere to and develop. It is uncertain 
whether Xi Jinping’s name will be attached to the “thought”. In any case, by
having his contribution to China’s guiding ideological principles designated as
“thought”, Xi Jinping has succeeded in elevating his stature next only to that 
of Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping.
While Xi Jinping’s ambition to be included in the pantheon of Chinese 
Communist revolutionary thinkers was glimpsed early in June 2014 when the 
Party theoretical fortnightly Qiu Shi (Seeking Truth) described him as “one 
of China’s greatest Communist leaders” who had put forward “new thinking,
new views and new conclusions”, the public campaign to promote inclusion 
of Xi Jinping’s thinking in the Party Constitution seriously kicked off in June 
2017. The social media account of the overseas edition of the CCP’s official 
mouthpiece People’s Daily had then revealed that the Director of the CCP CC 
General Office Li Zhanshu had announced in an internal speech in February
that President Xi Jinping’s political philosophy was “basically complete.” This 
was followed by a series of speeches eulogising Xi Jinping’s political wisdom.
In the weeks leading to the 19th Party Congress and between August 7
and September 18, 2017, Party Secretaries of 31 provinces and autonomous 
regions wrote signed articles in the official CCP newspaper People’s Daily
(see Appendix). Interestingly, in apparent indication of support to Xi Jinping,
PBSC members Zhang Dejiang, Liu Yunshan and Yu Zhengsheng separately
praised the “Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New 
Era” to delegates from the provinces during their group discussions on the 
sidelines of the ongoing Congress. 
– 61 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Over the next couple of days, they were joined by others publicly
displaying their loyalty to General Secretary Xi Jinping. Among them
were: Beijing Party Secretary Cai Qi, who called it “the third historic leap
forward in China’s application of Marxist-Leninism, after Mao Zedong
Thought and Deng Xiaoping Theory”; Shanghai Mayor Ying Yong; Gen Xu
Qiliang, Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission; Jiangsu Party
Secretary Li Qiang who said he felt “warmth and affection” for Xi Jinping’s
report; Shanghai Party Secretary Han Zheng, who called it a “thrilling”
report; Tianjin Party Secretary Li Hongzhong who said the report was
“magnificent, visionary and a pioneer of the era”; Chongqing Party Secretary
Chen Min’er who praised Xi Jinping by name several times in his sevenminute speech at the municipality’s panel; Liu Shiyu, Chairman of the China
Securities Regulatory Commission who said Xi Jinping had saved socialism
by bringing down high-ranking officials who intended to “usurp the Party
leadership and seize state power” and described Xi Jinping as a saviour of the
Communist Party; and Guangdong Party Secretary Hu Chunhua, though
reports claimed he was more restrained. Earlier, China’s Foreign Minister
Wang Yi wrote in the Study Times, the official newspaper of the Central
Party School (September 1, 2017) that Xi Jinping’s “diplomatic thought”
“innovates upon and transcends the past 300 years of traditional Western
international relations theory.”  Much earlier, on July 19, State Councillor 
Yang Jiechi praised Xi Jinping Thought in a signed article in Xinhua. PLA
units across China have been formed into ‘group study sessions’ since 
October 18, 2017, to study Xi Jinping’s Work Report.
Declaring that corruption is “the greatest threat” the Party faces, Xi 
Jinping promised in the report that the anti-corruption campaign will
continue. He announced that the intra-Party disciplinary practice of
Shanggui, that requires a CPC member under investigation to cooperate with
questioning at a designated place and a designated time, will be replaced with
detention. Suggesting that the anti-corruption campaign will be elevated to 
a higher pitch, Xi Jinping disclosed that a National Supervision Law—under 
discussion for passing at the National People’s Congress (NPC) session in
March 2018—will be enacted and supervisory commissions at the national,
provincial, city, and county levels will be established. There has, incidentally, 
– 62 – 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF XI JINPING’S WORK REPORT AT 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
been speculation in Beijing that Wang Qishan, who, in the normal course 
is expected to retire at this Congress, could be nominated Chairman of the 
new National Supervision Commission which could oversee even the Central 
Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC).
Highlighting that economic growth had picked up in the last five years
since 2012, Xi Jinping mentioned a 6.8 per cent growth rate target. He said
China’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose from Yuan 54 trillion to Yuan
80 trillion (US$ 8.2-US$ 12.1 trillion) over the past five years. He also said
1,500 reform measures had been introduced in the past five years and a lot of
pending plans had been implemented. However, while he said, “We will further
reform of SoEs, develop mixed-ownership economic entities, and turn Chinese
enterprises into world-class, globally competitive firms”, there was a hint of
resistance to the streamlining of SoEs when he added that there will be further
reform of these to make them “stronger, better and bigger”.
Regional and individual income inequalities and poverty were emphasised 
repeatedly in the Work Report as requiring close attention. Barely a month 
earlier, on September 14, the Hurun Rich List revealed that at least 74 
individuals had joined this year’s list with fortunes of at least US$ 300 million,
adding to the 2,056 who made last year’s list. Rupert Hoogewerf, Hurun 
Report Chairman and Chief Researcher, said, “Overall, the Hurun Rich List 
has grown faster than any year since 2007, with the possible exception of 
2015.” Poverty alleviation had been a key theme this year and merited its 
own paragraph in the Report. Xi Jinping also opted to represent the povertystricken Guizhou province as its delegate to the 19th Congress. He said that 
more than 60 million people have been lifted out of poverty over the past five 
years, but much remains to be done.
While there was no direct reference to the Dalai Lama or India in the 
Work Report, or for that matter to any other country, Xi Jinping did state: “We 
will fully implement the Party’s policy on religious affairs, uphold the principle
that religions in China must be Chinese in orientation and adapt to socialist
society”. The section on national security indicated Xi Jinping’s policy when
he said, “We must rigorously protest against, and take resolute measures to 
combat, all acts of infiltration, subversion, and sabotage, as well as violent and 
terrorist activities, ethnic separatist activities and religious extremist activities”. 
– 63 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
At a press conference on the sidelines of the ongoing Party Congress 
on October 21, the Executive Deputy Head and Vice Minister of the CCP 
CC United Front Work Department, Zhang Yijiong was more direct. In 
a remark with implications for India, he asserted that the Dalai Lama had 
“established a so-called government-in- exile, whose goal and core agenda
is the independence of Tibet and to separate (from) China. For decades, the 
group headed by the 14th Dalai Lama has never stopped such attempts. As 
head of the group, the 14th Dalai Lama has never stopped his activities in
this regard over the past decades”. Zhang Yijiong warned foreign officials that
they cannot get away by saying they were meeting the exiled Tibetan leader in 
a personal capacity as they still represent their governments. He added, “Any 
country,or any organisation of any one, accepting to meet with the Dalai Lama,
in our view, is a major offence to the sentiment of the Chinese people. The 
Chinese government opposes governments and organizations in any country
in the world to receive the Dalai Lama in any name. We consider such visits as 
a severe insult to the feelings of the Chinese people…”. Zhang Yijiong added
that Tibetan Buddhism was a special religion “born in our ancient China”. It’s 
a Chinese religion. It didn’t come in from the outside.
The Work Report made it clear that the anti-corruption campaign will
continue unabated. Party ideology will become more dominant with increased 
curbs to stall tendencies towards ‘liberal’or ‘Westernised’thinking. Instructions 
cautioning Party members to be atheists, avoid any religious practice and abide
by Party regulations were reissued just days prior to the Congress, indicating
that there will be no relaxation in religious policy or towards Tibetans and 
Uyghurs. The trend towards expanding the security apparatus will continue,
with Xi Jinping probably exercising greater direct control over it.
It is apparent that China will continue to pursue its objectives in the South 
China Sea. Suspicion of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) in
Taiwan will ensure continued pressure on it, possibly with efforts to further 
squeeze its diplomatic space.The comments regarding India made at the press 
briefing on the sidelines of the Congress give little room for comfort. 
– 64 – 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF XI JINPING’S WORK REPORT AT 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
Appendix 
List of Op-Eds by Party Secretaries 
1.	 Cai Qi (㭑ཷ), Beijing Party Secretary, 7/8/2017, People’s Daily 
2.	 Li Hongzhong (ᵾ呯ᘐ), Tianjin Party Secretary, 8/8/2017, People’s Daily 
3.	 Zhao Kezhi (䎥ݻᘇ), Hebei Party Secretary, 9/8/2017, People’s Daily 
4.	 Luo Huining (傶ᜐᆱ),Shanxi Party Secretary, 10/8/2017, People’s Daily 
5.	 Li Xi (ᵾᐼ), Liaoning Party Secretary, 11/8/2017, People’s Daily 
6.	 Bayin Chaolu (ᐤ丣ᵍ励), Jilin Party Secretary, 14/8/2017, People’s Daily 
7.	 Zhang Qingwei (ᕐᒶՏ), Heilongjiang Party Secretary, 15/8/2017, People’s Daily 
8.	 Han Zheng (丙↓), Shanghai Party Secretary, 16/8/2017, People’s Daily (also member 
of CCP Politburo) 
9.	 Li Qiang (ᵾᕪ), Jiangsu Party Secretary, 17/8/2017, People’s Daily 
10.	 Che Jun (䖖׺(, Zhejiang Party Secretary, 18/8/2017, People’s Daily 
11.	 Li Jinbin (ᵾ䭖ᮼ), Anhui Party Secretary, 21/8/2017, People’s Daily 
12.	 You Quan (ቔᵳ), Fujian Party Secretary, 22/8/2017, People’s Daily 
13.	 Lu Xinshe (咯ᗳ⽮), Jiangxi Party Secretary, 23/8/2017, People’s Daily 
14.	 Liu Jiayi (ࡈᇦѹ), Shandong Party Secretary, 24/8/2017, People’s Daily 
15.	 Xie Fuzhan (䉒Կⷫ), Henan Party Secretary, 25/8/2017, People’s Daily 
16.	 Jiang Chaoliang (㪻䎵㢟), Hubei Party Secretary, 28/8/2017, People’s Daily 
17.	 Du Jiahao (ᶌᇦ∛), Hunan Party Secretary, 29/8/2017, People’s Daily 
18.	 Hu Chunhua (㜑᱕ॾ), Guangdong Party Secretary (also member of CCP Politburo), 
30/8/2017, People’s Daily 
19.	 Peng Qinghua (ᖝ␵ॾ), Guangxi Autonomous Region Party Secretary, 31/8/2017, 
People’s Daily 
20.	 Liu Cigui (ࡈ䎀䍥), Hainan Party Secretary, 1/9/2017, People’s Daily 
21.	 Chen Miner (䱸᭿ቄ), Chongqing Party Secretary, 4/9/2017, People’s Daily 
22.	 Wang Dongming (⦻ь᰾), Sichuan Party Secretary, 5/9/2017, People’s Daily 
23.	 Chen Hao (䱸䊚), Yunnan Party Secretary, 6/9/2017, People’s Daily 
24. Sun Zhigang (ᆉᘇࡊ(, Guizhou Party Secretary, 7/9/2017, People’s Daily 
25 Li Jiheng (ᵾ㓚ᚂ), Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region Party Secretary, 8/9/2017, 
People’s Daily 
26.	 Wu Yingjie (੤㤡ᶠ), Tibet Autonomous Region Party Secretary, 11/9/2017, People’s 
Daily 
– 65 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
27. Lou Qinjian (ဴऔ؝(, Shanxi Party Secretary, 12/9/2017, People’s Daily 
28. Lin Duo (᷇䫾), Gansu Party Secretary, 13/9/2017, People’s Daily 
29. Wang Guosheng (⦻ഭ⭏), Qinghai Party Secretary, 14/9/2017, People’s Daily 
30. Shi Taifeng (⸣⌠ጠ), Ningxia Autonomous Region Party Secretary, 15/9/2017, 
People’s Daily 
31. Chen Quanguo (䱸ޘഭ), Xinjiang Autonomous Region Party Secretary, 18/9/2017, 
People’s Daily 
Comparison of References to ‘Party’ and ‘Army’ in Work Reports to Party
Congresses 
Party Congress 19th 18th 17th 16th 15th 14th 13th 12th 
 60 295 230 222 284 234 235 331 ފ ( ) Party
 8 13 27 33 46 54 49 86 (ߋ) Army
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on October 
21, 2017.) 
– 66 – 
10. Analysis of China’s 19th Party Congress
 
Already holding over 14 formal positions—more than any other Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) leader so far—CCP Central Committee (CC)
General Secretary Xi Jinping has, as anticipated, emerged considerably stronger
from this Congress. By skilful use of the sustained anti-corruption campaign, he
has eliminated opposition in the Party and military and drastically reduced the
influence wielded by his predecessor once removed, Jiang Zemin. In September
2017, China’s official media publicised that more than 176 CCP cadres
equivalent to the rank of central Vice Minister and above had been dismissed
and arrested for corruption and that more than 14,000 officers of the People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) had been similarly dismissed. At least 120 officers of
the PLA of and above the rank of Major General have been dismissed and
retired. 
Just weeks before the Congress, Xi Jinping publicly demonstrated his 
authority by arresting two top Generals (Fang Fengui and Zhang Yang),
appointing 20 General Officers to command 13 new Group Armies and 
promoting close associates to head the PLA Army (ground forces) and PLA 
Air Force (PLAAF). In a rare move, the names of 13 delegates selected by
Chongqing municipality were deleted, reducing the total number of delegates 
to 2,287. A couple of days before the commencement of the Congress,
another seven were ‘disqualified’. Politburo (PB) member and Chongqing 
Party Secretary Sun Zhengcai, viewed as a likely candidate for the Politburo 
Standing Committee (PBSC), was also suddenly dismissed on charges of 
graft. He had been admonished in February for not doing enough to eliminate 
the influence of imprisoned former PB member Bo Xilai.
Xi Jinping had also been projecting himself since November 2012. The 
People’s Daily, for example, during Jiang Zemin’s tenure used to publish 
approximately 3,000 stories per year mentioning him and during Hu Jintao’s 
term it published 2,000 each year mentioning Hu Jintao. In stark contrast, the 
People’s Daily already publishes 5,000 stories each year mentioning Xi Jinping. 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
A major highlight of the week-long (October 18-24, 2017) 19th Congress 
of the CCP, which was held in Beijing, was its recognition of Xi Jinping’s
contribution to Chinese Communist ideology. The Congress unanimously 
approved its incorporation into the Party Constitution as “Xi Jinping Thought
on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era”. He is the first 
CCP leader to have his contribution, attached to his name, enshrined in the 
Party Constitution while still alive. This places it next in heft to those of Mao 
Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, especially with the Chinese media already having
begun to headline it as “Xi Jinping Thought”! 
Xi Jinping’s ambition to be included in the pantheon of Chinese
Communist revolutionary thinkers was glimpsed early in June 2014 when the 
Party theoretical fortnightly Qiu Shi (Seeking Truth) described him as “one 
of China’s greatest Communist leaders” who had put forward “new thinking,
new views and new conclusions”. The public campaign to promote inclusion 
of Xi Jinping’s thinking in the Party Constitution seriously kicked off in June 
2017. The social media account of the overseas edition of the CCP’s official 
mouthpiece People’s Daily had then revealed that the Director of the CCP CC 
General Office Li Zhanshu had announced in an internal speech in February
that President Xi Jinping’s political philosophy was “basically complete.” This 
was followed by a series of speeches eulogising Xi Jinping’s political wisdom.
In the weeks leading to the 19th Party Congress and between August 7 and 
September 18, 2017, Party Secretaries of 31 provinces and autonomous regions 
wrote signed articles in the official CCP newspaper People’s Daily. 
The approval by the 19th Party Congress to the appointment of many
Xi Jinping loyalists, who now constitute the majority of the membership of
the Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC), Politburo (PB), CCP Central 
Committee’s (CC’s) Secretariat and Central Military Commission (CMC),
underscores the unmistakable—and anticipated—enhancement of Xi 
Jinping’s authority and influence. Pertinent in this context are the revelations 
by China’s official media in the weeks before the 19th Party Congress of the 
successes achieved by the campaign against corruption and, on the sidelines of 
the Congress on October 20, by Liu Shiyu, Chairman of the China Securities 
Regulatory Commission,who said,“Xi Jinping had saved socialism by bringing
down high-ranking officials who intended to usurp the Party leadership and 
– 68 – 
ANALYSIS OF CHINA’S 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
seize state power” and described “Xi Jinping as a saviour of the Communist 
Party”. Liu Shiyu has since been promoted to the CCP CC! 
Interesting are the affiliations of the new leaders appointed to the PBSC,
whose number remains at seven. The composition of the new PBSC shows 
that while Xi Jinping has followed the Party’s informal rules and conventions 
regarding the retirement age of senior echelon cadres, he has avoided inducting 
younger cadres who could be potential successors in the PBSC. The field 
for advancement to the next PBSC and as successors to Xi Jinping and Li
Keqiang has, therefore, been left wide open for the younger cadres now in the 
PB.The field is open too for Xi Jinping to continue in office as, which some of 
his acolytes have been saying since 2013, China enters a new thirty-year era 
like those of Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping earlier! 
The new Politburo, like the previous one, has 25 members. Apart from the 
seven PBSC members, among the remaining 17 PB members also, Xi Jinping
has a clear majority. At least 12 of them are long-time Xi Jinping loyalists,
not including the two Vice Chairmen of the Central Military Commission
(CMC) who are also his close and long time associates. Some of the PB
members are poised to take over as heads of Central Party organisations. They
all owe their rise to him. 
Equally important is the CCP CC Secretariat, which has in the past
five years under Xi Jinping become a powerful body. It reports directly to 
Xi Jinping. Xi Jinping has packed the important new 7-member CCP CC
Secretariat with loyalists and Wang Huning is its seniormost member. The 
previous 18th CCP CC Secretariat was headed by Liu Yunshan who also, like 
Wang Huning is now, was in charge of ideology, the propaganda apparatus
and Party organisation. Three of the Secretariat’s members are persons with a
background in security or the military, namely, Yang Xiaodu, Guo Shengkun
and Huang Kunming. The indication is that Party controls on these sectors 
will continue to become progressively tougher.
At least two members of the new CCP CC Secretariat have a background in
Tibet affairs. In addition to Wang Huning, who has in the past been a member of
Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) delegations to the National People’s Congress 
(NPC), these are Yang Xiaodu, a ‘sent down youth in the Cultural Revolution’and 
till recently Minister of Supervision who served in the TAR from 1976-2001, 
– 69 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and Guo Shengkun who as the Minister of Public Security (MPS) attended
meetings of the Leading Small Work Group on Tibet. Huang Kunming, another
member of the Secretariat, has served in the PLA. As anticipated, TAR Party
Secretary Wu Yingjie has been promoted to the new 19th CC as a full member.
In addition, this time there are two ethnic Tibetans, Qi Zhala (Choedak) and
Luosang Jiangcun (Lobsang Gyaltsen), as full members of the CC, or one more
than in the previous CC and one, Norbu Dhondup, as an alternate member of
the CC. Sun Chunlan who heads the CCP CC United Front Work Department
(UFWD) and handles Tibet affairs, continues as the solitary woman in the
PB despite being 67 years old, which actually puts her in the retirement zone.
Interestingly, Zhang Qingli, who was born in 1951 and earned a reputation as
a hardline TAR Party Secretary for his derogatory comments about the Dalai
Lama, continues as a full member of the 19th CC. Zhang Yijiong, present
Executive Deputy Head of the United Front Work Department (UFWD) and
Vice Minister, who on the sidelines of the 19th Party Congress, outlined China’s 
new strong policy towards the Dalai Lama, has been promoted from alternate
member of the 18th CC to full member of the 19th CC. All of them will have a 
strong voice in the formulation of the Tibet policy.
The new CMC consists of military officials who are all solid supporters of
Xi Jinping. The composition and size of the new Central Military Commission
(CMC) has also changed. For the present, it comprises only four members and 
does not include the heads of the different Services like the PLA Air Force 
(PLAAF), PLA Navy (PLAN), etc. The two CMC Vice Chairmen, former
PLAAF Commander Xu Qiliang and PLA Gen Zhang Youxia, are both
‘princelings’ with a long-time association with Xi Jinping. The new CMC Vice
Chairman, Zhang Youxia’s father Zhang Zongxun fought alongside Xi Jinping’s 
father and they were called ‘partners in blood’. Zhang Youxia had fought in the
Sino-Vietnam War in 1979. The presence of Xu Qiliang, Zhang Youxia and
PLA Rocket Force Commander Wei Fenghe in the CMC point to an emphasis
on the development and acquisition of modern, advanced defence technology.
The induction of Gen Li Zuocheng, head of the Joint Staff Department under
the CMC, and Lt. Gen Zhang Shengmin, Secretary of the PLA Discipline
Inspection Commission, indicate that Xi Jinping will maintain the stress 
on ‘clean’ and corruption free armed forces. Zhang Shengmin, incidentally, 
– 70 – 
 
ANALYSIS OF CHINA’S 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
previously served in the 52th, 55th and 56th Bases of the Second Artillery in the
Lanzhou Military Region and was Political Commissar of the Second Artillery
Command College between 2012 and 2013. Gen Miao Hua as head of the
Political Work Department under the CMC will further Xi Jinping’s agenda
of expanding Party control and supervision over China’s armed forces, ensuring
that the personnel are ‘red and expert’. 
The new appointments in the CCP’s top bodies will allow Xi Jinping to
pursue his ambitious agenda with few constraints. He will be free of any restraints
in pursuing the realisation of the “Two Hundreds”namely, the ‘China Dream’ (by
2021 which marks the CCP’s centenary) and the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI),
and making China an advanced developed nation by 2049, or the hundredth year
of the founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). It additionally leaves
open the possibility of him extending his term till nearly 2049.
There were some important additional highlights of the 19th Party
Congress. The Party, China and Army were mentioned often in Xi Jinping’s
Work Report along with a specific reference to the Belt and Road Initiative 
(BRI). Less mentioned were the economy, reform and development. Xi 
Jinping for the first time made a direct linkage between the completion of
China’s second and final stage of development in 2035 and the PLA becoming 
a world class fighting force.
There was emphasis on the PLA, with the term ‘Army’ mentioned more 
than double the number of times than in the Work Reports presented at the 
17th and 18th Congresses. It was mentioned 86 times in Xi Jinping’s Work
Report to the 19th Party Congress and 49 and 54 times in the Work Reports 
presented at the 18th and 17th Party Congresses respectively. Xi Jinping
announced that the Army’s focus will be on realisation of the ‘Chinese Dream’
for which it must develop “a new military strategy under the new situation”.
National defence and military modernisation will be promoted. Clarifying that
by 2020, mechanisation will be basically achieved and that the modernisation 
of national defence and the armed forces should be basically completed by
2035, Xi Jinping said that “IT has come a long way and strategic capabilities
have seen a big improvement.” He underscored technology as the PLA’s “core 
combat capability”. Xi Jinping asserted that the goal is to make the PLA a 
“world class force” that “can fight and win” by 2050. This timeline coincides 
– 71 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
with realisation of the BRI and China becoming a nation with the “pioneering
global influence”. Xi Jinping also pointedly described the PLA as a “People’s
Army”.
The references to Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan were uncompromising
with a strong suggestion of limits imposed on the three. With regard to Taiwan,
Xi Jinping said, “We have the resolve, the confidence and the ability to defeat
separatist attempts for ‘Taiwan independence’ in any form. We will never allow
anyone, any organisation or any political party, at any time or in any form, to
separate any part of Chinese territory from China”. He asserted that the CCP
“stands firm in safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and
will never allow the historical tragedy of national division to repeat itself ”.
There was pronounced emphasis in the Work Report on “the Party exercising
leadership over all areas of endeavour in every part of the country”,clearly indicating
that Party controls will be expanded and ideology will remain predominant. Xi
Jinping emphasised that “sweeping efforts” had been made to “strengthen Party
leadership and Party building” while dismissing any notion of copying “Western
style democracy”. There were 331 references to the ‘Party’ in this Work Report,
many more than in the Work Reports at the past eight Congresses.
Finally, Xi Jinping has lost no time in further consolidating his position and
concentrating more power in his person. The first meeting of the new Politburo
(PB) on October 27, in its notification, formally recognised Xi Jinping as the 
ruling Communist Party’s lingxiu—a reverential term for “leader” instead of 
the usual lingdao or lingji. It also stated that henceforth, all PB members will 
not only inspect all organisations and cadres under them and submit annual
reports to the concerned central Party organisations and the PB, but also to
Party General Secretary Xi Jinping. He has already announced that the anticorruption campaign will continue to be pursued with vigour, and appointed
his long-time loyalist and PBSC member Zhao Leji as head of the Central
Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC).
A clear indication of China’s confidence in founding a modern socialist 
country by 2050 was articulated by the state-owned Global Times on 
October 25, 2017. Stating that some Westerners find this level of confidence 
challenging, it said that they should actually see this as an opportunity and that
“it is time for these people to open their hearts to China”. Emphasising that 
– 72 – 
ANALYSIS OF CHINA’S 19TH PARTY CONGRESS 
China will not only be a strong nation with a first-class Army, but will focus 
on its continued pursuit of harmony, balancing an ecological environment,
and democracy, it said, “This modernized country will serve its people, rather 
than seek revenge upon the world in efforts to establish global hegemony”. At 
the same time, it warned that “China will not tolerate disruptions of any kind
during this new phase of socialist modernization” adding that “if, for whatever 
reason, the nation’s peaceful development is thwarted by external influence,
China will not hesitate to strike back with sharp strategic force, or if necessary,
prepare for a full-scale showdown. Of course, a situation of this nature will 
lead to consumption, and have a negative impact on the realization of the 
nation’s goal for 2050”. It said also that when “China’s peaceful ascension is 
realized, it will be a watershed moment for humanity, a form of development
completely removed from the laws of the jungle. The determination to grow 
into a powerful and peaceful nation will remain intact”. Pertinent to recall 
in this context is the resolution adopted at the Conference on Peripheral
Diplomacy in October 2013, that countries which oppose China will face 
periods of sustained opposition and pressure! 
In conclusion, the 19th Party Congress has sent out the following clear 
messages:
R5 The Party will pervade and dominate all sectors in China i.e. government,
military, economy and society. 
R5 China is confident it will achieve the developmental goals set out for the
first time by Xi Jinping i.e. 2020-35—to make China a technologically
advanced and moderately developed country in the top ranks of the 
world—and 2035-50 to make China a strong developed nation having
“pioneering global influence”. 
R5 “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a 
New Era” is an alternative to Western-style democracy. 
R5 Incorporation of the BRI in the Party Constitution now elevates it to a 
national development goal with the warning against its obstruction issued 
on October 25 taking on added significance. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
November 18, 2017.) 
– 73 – 
11. Distancing the PLA From Politics: 
Representatives in CCP Standing Committees 
Chinese President Xi Jinping has maintained a firm focus on the People’s
Liberation Army (PLA) ever since he was appointed General Secretary of 
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and Chairman of the Central Military 
Commission (CMC) at the 18th Party Congress in November 2012. Since 
then, he has initiated the most extensive reform ever of the PLA, including 
the demobilisation of 300,000 personnel. He has additionally brought the 
PLA within the purview of the Central Discipline Inspection Commission 
(CDIC), the Party’s anti-corruption watchdog body. Xi Jinping has 
simultaneously taken steps to divest it of its business enterprises, quietly push 
the PLA back into the barracks and insulate it from local politics. The latter 
probably motivated by the need to obviate recurrence of incidents like when 
ousted Politburo member Bo Xilai created “cliques” within the PLA. From 
2015, PLA officers began being removed from the Provincial Party Standing 
Committees. Indications are now surfacing that this policy is under review 
and possibly being reversed.
High on Xi Jinping’s list of priorities has been the tightening of the Party’s 
control over the PLA, professionalisation of the PLA and keeping it focussed
on military training. At an ‘enlarged’ meeting of the CMC the day after taking
over as its Chairman, he declared that political reliability will be the determining
criterion for promoting PLA officers. This has been bolstered by Xi Jinping’s 
conviction that that by designating the Army as the “Army of the state”, the
Soviet leadership had actually “disarmed” the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union (CPSU). Consecutive campaigns in the PLA “educate” its personnel that
it is an “Army of the Party” and that its officers must “absolutely obey” the Party.
An important reason for the campaigns is the worry that has dogged the CCP
leadership, particularly since 2011-12, that new college graduates joining the
PLA who might have been exposed to ‘Western’ and ‘liberal’ ideas advocating 
 
DISTANCING THE PLA FROM POLITICS: REPRESENTATIVES IN CCP STANDING COMMITTEES 
that the PLA should be an ‘Army of the state’ could carry these into their Army 
careers. 
In the meantime, since 2015, apparently as part of the military reform,
Xi Jinping began quietly dismantling the military-political coordination 
mechanism set up since before the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution 
(GPCR) and which proved effective to an extent in reining in the excesses of the
Red Guards. There was, consequently, since that date, a gradual effort to drop
PLA representatives from the Party’s provincial-level Standing Committees.
Till December 2017, 17 provinces and autonomous regions out of a total of 31
had no PLA representative in their Party Standing Committees. These were:
Xinjiang, Anhui, Henan, Shanxi, Jiangxi, Tibet, Hunan, Jiangsu, Guangxi,
Hebei, Inner Mongolia, Fujian, Liaoning, Yunnan, Shanghai, Tianjin and
Gansu. 
Interestingly, the two troubled Autonomous Regions of Tibet and 
Xinjiang were among those where there was no PLA representative on the 
Party Standing Committees. The official Beijing Daily observed that this 
was part of the military reform and that the Xinjiang Military Region, Tibet 
Military Region and Beijing garrison had been transferred directly to the
PLA’s control, implying that they would report to the CMC. It added that 
the other 28 provincial military commands would come under the National 
Defence Mobilisation Department (NDMD) under the State Council and 
CMC. 
Lt. Gen. Sheng Bin, former Deputy Commander of Shenyang Military
Region who is now the Director of the CMC’s NDMD that was established 
on January 11, 2016, under Xi Jinping’s military reforms, said in an interview 
with the China National Defence News in March 2016, that as per existing
laws and regulations, the provincial military command is at par with the
Party’s military, local government military service agencies and local garrison 
coordinating agencies. He clarified that with the new changes, the NDMD’s 
functions would include: the Emergency Response Command, local Party
military affairs, Reserve Force of the Ministry of Construction, military 
service department of the same level and coordination of military and civilian
affairs.The Military District system is now managed by the NDMD, relieving
Theatre Commands of many administrative burdens, including the supervision 
– 75 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
of militia work in the provinces. The exact role of Theatre Commands in the 
development of national defence mobilisation capabilities is, however, not yet 
clear. 
Well-informed Beijing-based Chinese analysts and some state-owned 
Chinese papers have observed that the major concerns behind the move were
to prevent PLA officers from exercising influence for personal profit; curb 
corruption in the PLA; prevent senior military officers from getting involved 
in politics in the provinces; and prevent senior PLA officers from building
lobbies in the CCP. A major factor cited by them was Xi Jinping’s emphasis 
on professionalisation of the PLA, which implies elevated levels of training
and keeping PLA personnel focussed on military training tasks. Another 
important factor would be that as the PLA downsizes and its resources get 
stretched, the administrative burden on PLA officers needs to be reduced. 
Prof. Xu Yaotong of the Chinese Academy of Governance said that the 
withdrawal of military officers from the Standing Committees would have a 
positive impact on the development of a modern military force. In an interview 
to China News Weekly, Prof Xu Yaotong said not choosing military officers as
Provincial Party Standing Committee members would help to create wellequipped military forces in the future.
A major reversal in this policy has, however, become evident from 
December 2017, since when PLA officers have begun to be brought back into 
the Provincial Party Standing Committees. PLA Maj Gen Han Xiaodong,
Political Commissar of the Hebei Military District was inducted on December 
30, 2017 to the Hebei Provincial Party Standing Committee and PLA Maj
Gen Wang Bianjiang, Political Commissar of the Liaoning Military District 
was inducted on December 30,2017,to the Liaoning Provincial Party Standing
Committee. Clearly confirming the reversal of the earlier policy, Lt Gen Xu 
Yong, Commander of the Tibet Military Region, has also been reinducted into 
the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) Party Standing Committee. Till now,
however, there is no PLA representative in the Party Standing Committee of
the Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous Region.
A total of 15 provinces and autonomous regions have till January 28, 2018,
now got PLA representatives in their respective Party Standing Committees.
These are: Hubei, Anhui, Hebei, Hainan, Liaoning, Hunan, Guangdong, 
– 76 – 
DISTANCING THE PLA FROM POLITICS: REPRESENTATIVES IN CCP STANDING COMMITTEES 
Gansu, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, TAR, Shandong, Sichuan, Beijing and GuangxiZhuang AR. Seven of the 15 are PLA Commanders while the remaining are 
Political Commissars. 
A list of the PLA officers appointed to the Provincial Party Standing
Committees is appended. 
Appendix 
1.	 Maj Gen Ma Tao (傜⏋), member of Hubei Provincial Standing Committee (Date of 
announcement: January 2, 2018), Commander of Hubei Military District (appointed 
in August, 2017) 
2.	 Maj Gen Yang Zheng (ᶘᖱ), member of Anhui Provincial Standing Committee 
(Date of announcement: January 2, 2018), Commander of Anhui Military District 
(appointed in August, 2017). 
3.	 Maj Gen Han Xiaodong ( 丙 ᲃ ь ), member of Hebei Provincial Standing 
Committee (Date of announcement: December 30, 2017), Political Commissar of 
Hebei Military District (appointed in August 2017). 
4.	 Maj Gen Chen Shoumin (䱸ᆸ≁), member of Hainan Provincial Committee and 
Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 2, 2018), Commander of 
Hainan Military District (appointed in May 2016). 
5.	 Maj Gen Wang Bianjiang (⦻䗩⮶), member of Liaoning Provincial Standing 
Committee (Date of announcement: December 30, 2017), Political Commissar of 
Liaoning Military District (appointed in December 2016). 
6.	 Maj Genl Feng Yi (ߟ(⇵, member of Hunan Provincial Committee and Standing 
Committee (Date of announcement: January 3, 2018), Political Commissar of Hunan 
Military District (appointed in April 2017). 
7.	 Maj Gen Zhang Liming (ᕐ࡙᰾), member of Guangdong Provincial Committee 
and Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 3, 2018), Commander of 
Guangdong Military District (appointed in January 2015). 
8.	 Maj Gen Pu Yongneng (㫢≨㜭), member of Gansu Provincial Committee and 
Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 3, 2018), Political Commissar 
of Gansu Military District (appointed in July 2017). 
9.	 Maj Gen Meng Zhongkang (ᆏѝᓧ), member of Jiangsu Provincial Committee and 
Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 3, 2018), Political Commissar 
of Jiangsu Military District (appointed in May 2017). 
– 77 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
10.	 Maj Gen Yang Xiaoxiang (ᶘㅁ⾕), member of Jiangxi Provincial Committee and 
Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 3, 2018), Political Commissar 
of Jiangxi Military District (appointed in March 2015). 
11.	 Lt Gen Xu Yong (䇨ࣷ(, member of TAR Standing Committee (Date of 
announcement: January 6, 2018), Commander of TAR Military Region. 
12.	 Maj Gen Zhao Jilu (䎥ް励), member of Shandong Provincial Committee and 
Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 4, 2018), Commander of 
Shandong Military District (appointed in May 2017). 
13.	 Maj Gen Jiang Yongshen (ဌ≨⭣), member of Sichuan Provincial Committee and 
Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 5, 2018), Commander of 
Sichuan Military District (appointed in July 2015). 
14.	 Lt Gen Jiang Yong (ဌࣷ(, member of Beijing Standing Committee (Date of 
announcement: January 4, 2018), Political Commissar of Beijing Garrison (appointed 
in January 2015) 
15.	 Maj Gen Jiang Yingyu (ဌ 㤡 ᆷ), member of Guangxi Autonomous Region 
Committee and Standing Committee (Date of announcement: January 3, 2018), 
Political Commissar of Guangxi Military District (appointed in July 2016). 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
January 27, 2018.) 
– 78 – 
12. Initial Assessment of China’s CPPCC Plenary 
Session, 2019 
Earlier in March this year, China successfully concluded plenary meetings of 
the Party’s top two bodies, which set the agenda for the year ahead. Some 2,158 
delegates of China’s top political advisory body, the Chinese People’s Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC) gathered in the Great Hall of the People 
in Beijing from March 9-11, 2019. The CPPCC’s responsibilities include 
supervising the United Front Work Department (UFWD) and overseeing 
work relating to China’s ethnic minorities, enacting regulations and policies 
for China’s ethnic minorities, interacting with non-Communist entities and 
forging relations with foreign political parties, creating pro-Beijing lobbies 
abroad, etc. The plenary sessions are intended to formalise the approval of 
the 89 million-strong Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to its leadership’s 
policies, programmes and the budget for the coming year.
This year, the plenums of the CPPCC and China’s version of a Parliament, 
the National People’s Congress (NPC), had as their backdrop the noticeably
widening popular dissatisfaction with Xi Jinping and his policies among China’s 
populace. The unabated restiveness in the Tibet and Xinjiang Autonomous
Regions have been causes of serious concern to the Chinese authorities, especially
as this year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the 14th Dalai Lama’s flight from
Tibet and of the failed 1959 Tibetan uprising against Chinese occupation. A
consequence is the imposition of more stringent security controls in both these
autonomous regions. China’s approximately 10,000-word White Paper released
on March 18, 2019, noted that “some of the most notorious terrorist attacks” that 
have taken place in the world and, in a bid to justify the internment camps that
have been set up in Xinjiang where 1.5 million Uyghurs are incarcerated, claimed
that it has arrested nearly 13,000 people it describes as terrorists and has broken
up hundreds of “terrorist gangs” in Xinjiang since 2014. While neither Tibet
nor Xinjiang were reported by the official Chinese official media to have been
prominent in the deliberations, they certainly hung over the plenary sessions. 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
The Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) witnessed a series of security
conferences in Lhasa and the other administrative districts in the months 
leading up to the CPPCC plenary session. These were reinforced with the 
imposition of sterner measures in Tibetan Buddhist monasteries and on 
Tibetans. At least one ‘reeducation’ camp, akin to those established in the 
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR), is reported to have been 
established in the TAR’s second largest town of Shigatse and is managed by
the People’s Armed Police Force (PAPF), now under the People’s Liberation 
Army (PLA). Tibet was declared off-limits to journalists and foreigners for
an extended period till April 30 and TAR leaders inspected Tibetan Buddhist 
monasteries and convened a series of conferences of security cadres to “uncover”
and “eliminate” the “double-faced cadres” owing loyalty to the Dalai Lama.
Chinese armed police personnel and armoured police cars staged a show of
force in Lhasa on March 7.The issue of a White Paper on Tibet on March 27,
within days of conclusion of the CPPCC session, suggests it would have been 
discussed by that body. Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) member and
CPPCC Chairman Wang Yang also visited Xinjiang immediately after the 
CPPCC plenary.
Despite these signs of discontent, the reports presented to the plenary
sessions by Chinese Premier Li Keqiang and CPPCC Chairman Wang
Yang bore the firm imprimatur of Chinese President Xi Jinping and 
affirmed his authority. Li Keqiang and Wang Yang opened their reports 
with acknowledgments of Xi Jinping’s position as the “core of the Party”. Li 
Keqiang’s report contained 15 references to Xi Jinping and not one to Mao
Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, or his predecessors. Only Xi Jinping’s political 
ideology found mention in the reports. Of the 15 and 19 tasks mentioned in 
the reports to the NPC and CPPCC plenary sessions respectively, the first two 
listed following “the strong leadership of the Party Central Committee with
Xi Jinping at the core” and “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese 
Characteristics in the New Era”. 
As per tradition, the CPPCC met first. CPPCC Chairman and Politburo 
Standing Committee (PBSC) member Wang Yang delivered the CPPCC’s 
annual work report to the 2,158 assembled CPPCC delegates on March 
4, 2019. Unlike on previous occasions, interestingly, on this occasion, the 
– 80 – 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF CHINA’S CPPCC PLENARY SESSION, 2019 
CPPCC Chairman’s report acknowledged Chinese President Xi Jinping’s
preeminent position and said that in 2019, “top priority will be given to 
studying and implementing Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese 
Characteristics for a New Era.” He clarified, “The second task is offering
high-quality suggestions on the central tasks of the Party and the country.”
The body’s four other major tasks for the year are: (i) “making greater efforts 
for unity and friendly ties [between the Party and non-Party elements]”; (ii)
“contributing wisdom and strength to major country diplomacy with Chinese 
characteristics”; (iii) “making solid progress in the self-improvement of the 
CPPCC”; and (iv) “holding celebrations for the 70th anniversary of the
CPPCC’s founding”.
China’s authoritative official Xinhua News Agency (March 8) said that
during the sessions of the NPC and the CPPCC, Chinese President Xi 
Jinping told the delegates to the two conferences that social science and the 
works of art and culture relate to the theoretical foundation and propaganda 
vehicles of the Chinese Communist Party’s ideology. He said that social 
science and art should focus on socialism with “Chinese characteristics.” 
Xinhua added that Xi Jinping said that without a soul, a country and a nation 
cannot stand. Works of culture and the arts, philosophy, and social science 
belong to “the work of casting for souls”. They play an important role in the 
new era of developing socialism. Xi Jinping advised that “philosophy and 
social science research should be based on the great practice of socialism with
Chinese characteristics” and should put forward creative and original theories.
He emphasised that the year is “the 70th anniversary of the founding of the
New China. It is necessary to present China’s historical achievements and the 
theoretical and cultural advantages of socialism with “Chinese characteristics”.
The CPPCC also, quite unusually, held its second, third, and fourth 
plenary meetings in quick succession between March 9 to 11, 2019. Briefly,
in the second plenary session on March 9, 14 CPPCC National Committee 
members spoke about building an economic and ecological civilisation.
They stressed on the importance of “realizing high-quality development,”
“stimulating the innovative vitality of enterprises”, resolving “zombie 
company” issues, enhancing the quality of poverty alleviation, pushing
forward rural vitalisation, and protecting the ecological environment of the 
– 81 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Tibetan plateau. At the third plenary meeting, 15 members spoke on cultural
and social construction. Their speeches focussed on “telling the China Story 
well” through works of art and literature, improving child care and elder care
services, promoting the healthy development of the Artificial Intelligence (AI)
industry, continuing “the discovery of space with Chinese characteristics” and 
strengthening employment support. The fourth plenary meeting discussed
political construction and the work of the United Front and CPPCC. They
highlighted the importance of “deepening civil exchanges between the two 
sides of the Taiwan Strait,”utilizing the “unique advantage of overseas Chinese”
for the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), “establishing a robust and new type of 
supervision management mechanism,” and “adhering to the direction of the 
Sinicization of our country’s Christianity.”
Speaking at the session Yang Jie, a CPPCC member and researcher from
an agriculture academy in Suzhou city of East China’s Anhui province, stressed
that “Chinese Muslims are Chinese citizens first” and that “[religious people]
must unite and lead the religious masses well... must study and use the common
spoken and written Chinese language well… must lead the fight against
separatism, extreme terrorism, and religious extremism… [and] must lead the
masses to be grateful for the Party, listen to the Party, and follow the Party.”
Also, at the fourth plenary meeting, the head of the National Committee 
of the “Three-Self Patriotic Movement”, Xu Xiaohong stressed the need 
for Chinese Christians to “adhere to China’s Sinicization of Christianity 
orientation and actively adapt to socialist society.” Stating that “many
outstanding problems exist in Christianity, including outside infiltration,
a lack of high-quality pastors who love their country and religion”, etc., he 
warned that “without further attention, [these problems] could produce 
serious political consequences.” Xu Xiaohong emphasised that attempts by
“Western anti-China forces to continue influencing China’s social stability
and even subverting its regime through Christianity are doomed to failure.”
CPPCC National Committee President Wang Yang and Vice Premier 
Hu Chunhua attended all the meetings.
An important disclosure was made by Wang Jiangping, Vice Minister of
Industry and Information Technology, while speaking to CPPCC delegates
on March 7. He disclosed that China has a secret programme to support the 
– 82 – 
 
 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT OF CHINA’S CPPCC PLENARY SESSION, 2019 
microchip and software industries. His comments were leaked to reporters.
Wang Jiangping said, “Last year, the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology planned the ‘Zhengxin Zhuhun’ project under the leadership of the
Party Central Committee and the State Council.” He added, “The state will
give strong policy and funding support, because industries such as microchips
and software need to be iteratively developed.”Wang Jiangping also said,“[We]
spoke very little to the outside world [about the program].” However, Wang
Jiangping’s remarks were soon removed from the Chinese internet. 
Another interesting disclosure was by biophysicist Rao Zihe, a CPPCC 
delegate. He said (March 10) that Research and Development (R&D)
spending would hit 2.5 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2019,
citing Beijing’s medium and long-term plans for science and technology
development for 2006 to 2020.
To mark the end of the CPPCC meeting, the Party’s official People’s 
Daily published an editorial on March 14, congratulating the CPPCC on a 
successful meeting.The editorial affirmed that “we will be able to surmount all 
difficulties and obstacles in our path moving forward as long as [we] congregate
Chinese people of different party affiliations, religions, ethnicities, and [social]
statuses at home and abroad, and form the broadest patriotic united front 
that is devoted to realizing the reunification of the motherland and the China 
Dream of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.” 
The CPPCC plenum clearly indicated that China would continue with 
its current policies of the CCP ‘Sinicising’ Buddhism, Christianity and Islam
in China. It affirmed that Beijing would appoint the high-ranking Tibetan 
Buddhist religious personages, with the White Paper on Tibet (March 27,
2019) emphasising that Beijing had appointed the 17th Karmapa as one
example. There was no suggestion of ‘negotiations’ or ‘contacts’ with the Dalai 
Lama and noticeable too, was the absence of direct personal criticism of the 
84-year-old Dalai Lama. It is apparent that Beijing has decided to ‘appoint’ its 
‘own’ Dalai Lama and is waiting out the present Dalai Lama. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on March 
30, 2019.) 
– 83 – 
13. A Brief Assessment of China’s 3rd Session of 
the 13th CPPCC, May 2020 
As usual China’s top political advisory body, the Chinese People’s Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC), held its annual plenary session in Beijing 
along with the National People’s Congress (NPC). The plenum was delayed 
this year and held two months later from May 21 to May 27, 2020, because 
of the coronavirus pandemic. The pandemic cast a shadow over the plenary 
meetings, which were shortened to a week instead of the usual ten days and 
restrictions curtailed the number of press conferences and correspondents 
allowed to attend. For the first time, provision for video conferencing was 
made for those not physically attending the CPPCC and NPC Plenums.
Han Fangming, Vice Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the 
CPPCC National Committee, said prior to start of the sessions, that “due to 
the COVID-19 epidemic and the shortened session, the accommodation and 
meeting venues for CPPCC members and NPC delegates are simpler, stricter 
and more efficient.” Hotels and meeting rooms for the sessions accordingly 
provided reduced services, with fewer newspapers and no banners, red carpets,
flowers, bars or cafes. CPPCC members and NPC delegates were asked to 
bring their own pens or notepads and at the venue, they were provided only
a single bottle of water, a tea cup, and a pack of antiseptic wipes. Full-page 
reminders on how to avoid catching the virus and block its spreading were
handed out to each invitee. ‘Social distancing’ was enforced and attendees 
were encouraged not to shake hands, congregate outside the meeting rooms 
or linger in confined places, as well as not leave their hotels or the convention 
areas without permission from the organisers.
To burnish the credibility of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP),
which was dented by unprecedented public criticism, particularly during the 
coronavirus pandemic, the state-owned China Central Television (CCTV)
on the eve of the ‘Big Two’ sessions reported (May 21), that CCP members 
had donated RMB 8.36 billion (US$ 1.18 billion) for the fight against the 
A BRIEF ASSESSMENT OF CHINA’S 3RD SESSION OF THE 13TH CPPCC, MAY 2020 
coronavirus in the past three months. It said all the money was sent to the
‘Party Central Committee’ for redistribution. Chinese President Xi Jinping
also sought to further tighten his grip over the Party and People’s Liberation 
Army (PLA) and shore up his position, with the sudden announcement on 
May 21 that 17 Deputies to the NPC had been asked to resign. Four of them 
were senior PLA officers, with a Lieutenant General and one Major General
having outstanding records.
Some developments timed to coincide with the opening of the ‘Big Two’ 
on May 21, did, however, occur to embarrass China’s leadership. At least three
critics of Chinese President Xi Jinping and the CCP succeeded in publicising
their criticism. These included: Shanghai-based Chinese constitutional lawyer,
43-year old Zhang Xuezhong, posting an ‘open’ letter on WeChat on May 9,
addressed to all NPC Deputies; retired senior Central Party School Professor
Cai Xia whose scathing criticism of Xi Jinping and the CCP on a 20-minute
recording circulated for almost a month on the Chinese web; and the publication
on May 21, in Hong Kong’s Mainland China of an over 2,000-character essay
penned by Xu Zhangrun, former Professor of Law at Beijing’s prestigious
Tsinghua University who has near iconic status among China’s academics and 
intellectuals. Separately, the White House released a toughly worded 16-page
document titled “The United States Strategic Approach to China” on May 20,
which put the spotlight on the strained US-China relationship that has adversely 
impacted China’s economy and realisation of its ‘Two Centenary’ goals. Quite
interestingly, the document comments: “Our approach is not premised on
determining a particular end state for China”, possibly to assure the CCP that
the American objective is not to destroy it!
Preparatory to the CPPCC and NPC plenums, Xinhua (May 15) reported
that the Politburo met on May 15 to discuss the draft of the State Council’s 
Government Work Report that Chinese Premier Li Keqiang would present
to the third meeting of the 13th NPC. Xinhua said the meeting believed that
in the past year “China’s development has faced many difficult challenges”, but
“the Party Central Committee, with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core” united all
the people to overcome difficulties and complete the main goals and tasks of the
year. It said the Party Central Committee has made epidemic prevention and
control a top priority. The meeting, it said, “emphasised that the current global 
– 85 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
epidemic situation and the world economic situation are still grim and complex,
and the challenges facing China’s development are unprecedented”. It claimed
“to do a good job in the government this year”, the “strong leadership of the
Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core, and under the
guidance of Xi Jinping’s socialist ideology with Chinese characteristics in the
new era” was necessary. It emphasised the importance of expanding domestic
demand, achieving the goal of tackling poverty, promoting the agricultural
harvest and increasing the farmers’ incomes.
Some 2,158 CPPCC delegates and 2,878 Deputies to the NPC, who 
included the 290 Deputies representing the People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
and People’s Armed Police (PAP), assembled in Beijing’s Great Hall of the 
People from May 21 for the week-long plenary sessions. As per practice,
CPPCC delegates were permitted to sit-in on NPC meetings though not 
vote. 
On May 21, the opening day of the third session of the 13th National
Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference 
(CPPCC), Wang Yang, CPPCC Chairman and PBSC member, in his report
announced: “We will ensure the long-term stability of ‘one country, two systems.
“We will continue to support the improvement of the implementation of the
systems and mechanisms of the Constitution and Basic Law.” The Global Times 
(May 21) said the CPPCC would also organise people from minority ethnic 
groups and religious fields to hold coordination meetings; strengthen members
from Hong Kong and Macao on their political responsibilities in carrying out
their missions centred on the “one China, two systems” principle; firmly support
the implementations of the Constitution and the Basic Law in the Special
Administrative Regions (SARs); and deepen exchanges between the Chinese
Mainland and people from Taiwan island. The CPPCC would deepen work on
building consensus. Guided by patriotism and socialism, it would seek common
ground while shelving differences and building consensus among all domestic
and overseas Chinese in realising the Chinese people’s rejuvenation. 
Later, on May 21, representatives from Beijing’s Hong Kong and Macao
Affairs Office (HKMAO) met the Hong Kong Deputies to the NPC to explain
the details of the National Security Law. Xia Baolong, a close, old associate
of Chinese President Xi Jinping and Vice Chairman of the CPPCC National 
– 86 – 
 
A BRIEF ASSESSMENT OF CHINA’S 3RD SESSION OF THE 13TH CPPCC, MAY 2020 
Committee, who was recently appointed Director of the HKMAO, was present.
According to Ta Kung Pao (May 28), meeting 200 CPPCC delegates on the
final day of the plenary sessions on May 28 in Beijing, Xia Baolong said it is
“Hong Kong independence”, tyranny and external hostile forces that cause
harm to Hong Kong. These forces, especially the United States, attempt to
turn Hong Kong into an independent or semi-independent region. They want
to undermine the central government’s overall governance of Hong Kong or 
even seize Hong Kong’s governance and turn Hong Kong into their colony. He
warned,“We must not underestimate the determination of the central authorities 
... to implement the ‘one country, two systems’ policy”. Xia Baolong also quoted
President Xi Jinping’s three “unchanging” positions on the central government’s 
stance on Hong Kong last year, including his unwavering determination
to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests, his
unwavering determination to implement the “one country, two systems” policy,
and his opposition to naysayers. He asserted that the determination of external
forces to interfere in Hong Kong affairs is unwavering.
A Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) delegation led by TAR Party Secretary
Wu Yingjie and which included China’s Minister of Public Security Zhao
Kezhi, participated in the deliberations. State Councillor and Minister of Public
Security Zhao Kezhi said,“We must do our best on the anti-separatism campaign
and the implementation of various measures to maintain stability, strengthen 
infrastructure construction of stability, make preparations for long-term struggle.”
There were some CPPCC delegates whose suggestions attracted the
notice of China’s official media. Mutanlip Khasem, a member of the CPPCC 
and Deputy Head of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region People’s 
Congress Standing Committee, said on the sidelines of the ‘Big Two’ meetings
that the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region has recorded no terror related 
incidents in the past three and half years. He said after the 18th Party Congress,
the region struck hard and maintained high pressure on the three forces of 
separatism, extremism and terrorism, and effectively contained the spread of 
terrorism in Xinjiang. Criticising the so-called Uyghur Human Rights Policy
Act of 2019 passed by the US House of Representatives, he said its purpose
is to sow dissension among various ethnic groups in China and that the antiChina forces deliberately smear, vilify and demonise China. 
– 87 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Gonjo Chozin, a CPPCC member from Zhari township in Tibet said,“The
poverty alleviation work in Tibet has achieved a decisive victory. Our poverty
alleviation measures are systematic. At the grassroots level, actions speaks louder
than words. Our work matters for the last mile of ending extreme poverty in
Tibet. Only by doing all the poverty reduction work wholeheartedly can we
really help the ones who are in need.”She added,“During the poverty eradication
process, we met a lot of challenges, as we focused on meeting such demands as
a proper arrangement to help them settle down. We encouraged them to join in
our efforts to get off from poverty.” The state-owned China Global Television
Network (CGTN) added that by the end of 2019, all 19 counties and countylevel prefectures in the Tibet Autonomous Region, which was known as one of
the regions with the highest poverty rates in China, were lifted out of poverty.
Zhao Xiaojin, Party Chief of the China Academy of Space Technology
(CAST) and a member of the 13th CPPCC National Committee, said 
(May 23) that the Chinese space industry insiders are considering using the 
country’s upcoming space station as a facility for large-scale space-borne
biology experiments in order to constantly increase China’s ability to safeguard 
its biosecurity. He disclosed that China plans to send two more advanced 
Earth observation satellites from the Gaofen satellite family in 2020 and will
conduct a Mars sample return mission by around 2030, as well as a Jovian 
system probe mission. 
Wu Changde, CPPCC member and former Deputy Director of the CMC 
Political Work Department suggested arrangements for the employment of 
veterans. He said job security for veterans is critical for maintaining social
stability and keeping employment stable. It is also important for stabilising
and boosting the military’s will and morale and strengthening national
defence and military development. Wu Changde suggested: (i) education and 
guidance should be strengthened, and former ideological concepts should
be changed. As veterans are valuable for economic and social development,
the Chinese military and localities should make joint efforts to ensure their 
employment. At the same time, veterans should also take the initiative to adapt
to the needs of local economic and social development and take bold steps to 
start their careers at the forefront of the market economy after demobilisation 
or retirement. (ii) The key to achieving high-quality and full employment for 
– 88 – 
A BRIEF ASSESSMENT OF CHINA’S 3RD SESSION OF THE 13TH CPPCC, MAY 2020 
veterans is to rely on secondary vocational institutions to conduct employment 
skills training, formulate qualification certification standards, step up support 
and strengthen supervision and management to ensure the quality of training.
Vocational and technical colleges and enterprises could cooperate so that 
veterans can sign work contracts upon entering the school and accept targeted
training in correspondence with their respective positions. They could get 
relevant training on grassroots organisation work and leadership management
and be assigned to the municipal or county Party committee schools, or 
relevant colleges and universities, for special short-term training courses.
Wang Lianying, CPPCC member and Deputy Director of the Military
Sports Training Centre under the CMC Training and Administration 
Department, made three proposals: (a) scientific research on military sports 
shall be intensified to better guide military training and the Military Sports 
Training Centre shall provide good services for the troops in that area; (b)
training of military sports talents in grassroot military units shall be improved 
to make them more capable in organising training; (c) new ways and methods 
shall be explored to better serve the service members, such as inviting military 
sports experts and stars to answer their questions online.
President Xi Jinping met CPPCC delegates from the economic sector 
attending a joint group meeting on May 23. He joined them in the discussion
and heard their comments and suggestions. 
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, speaking to the CPPCC, dropped the 
word ‘peaceful’ whilst talking about the unification of Taiwan. Meanwhile, the 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Sichuan Academy of Fine Arts, published
some images simulating the takeover of Taiwan by the PLA.This was corrected 
in the final Government Work Report approved by the NPC.
All seven Politburo Standing Committee members, including Vice 
President Wang Qishan and the Vice Chairmen of the CPPCC, attended 
the opening session of the CPPCC. None of them was wearing a mask while 
everyone else was! 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on June 
15, 2020.) 
– 89 – 
14. An Assessment of the Second Plenum of 
China’s 13th National People’s Congress 
As per tradition, China convened the plenary sessions of its top political advisory 
body, the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and 
China’s version of a Parliament, the National People’s Congress (NPC), in the 
Great Hall of the People in Beijing in the first fortnight of March. Popularly
referred to as the ‘Lianghui’, or ‘Big Two’, the plenary sessions set the agenda 
for the year ahead. Some 2,158 delegates of the CPPCC and 2,948 Deputies 
of the NPC, gathered in Beijing from March 9-11, 2019 and March 5-15,
2019 respectively to formally accord the approval of the entire 89 millionstrong Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to the policies, programmes and 
budget of the CCP leadership for the coming year.
The backdrop to the plenary sessions was the dissatisfaction with Xi
Jinping and his policies that has been spreading throughout China since the 
latter half of last year. Senior Party cadres and reputed Chinese academics 
like the former editor of the Communist Youth League’s (CYL’s) official 
newspaper Li Datong, Peking University alumnus Fan Liqun and Tsinghua
University’s Xu Zhangrun, have publicly articulated their discontent, 
including against the abolition of age and term-limits for the posts of Chinese 
President and Vice President and the CCP Politburo.They specifically warned 
against any return after thirty years to the ‘one-man’ rule of Mao Zedong.
Worker discontent has also been on the rise, with 1,795 strikes—higher 
than in the previous year—reported across China. They occurred in every
province of China except the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR). Protests 
by veteran and demobilised soldiers added to the CCP leadership’s anxieties
and their concern is reflected in the series of measures adopted since mid2018 to ameliorate the unhappiness of veterans and demobilised personnel.
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang specifically referred to the need for promoting 
their welfare in his “Report on the Work of the Government” presented to 
the NPC on March 5. 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SECOND PLENUM OF CHINA’S 13TH NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
Economists and owners of private enterprises too were unusually candid in 
their criticism of government policies.Renmin University Prof.Xiang Songzuo
highlighted serious doubts about the economy at a public function, which was 
promptly censored on the Chinese internet, declaring that a “research group
of an important institution” released an internal report stating China’s Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) growth this year was about 1.67 per cent! Chen
Hongtian, Chairman of the Cheung Kei Group and member of the CPPCC,
warned China’s private business entrepreneurs to prepare for a “winter colder 
and longer than expected”. Others were critical, for example, of the restrictions 
in the Party’s Constitution on private property, and failure to reform the State 
owned Enterprises (SoEs) which, they said, had, on the contrary, expanded to 
enter every area of economic activity.There is disaffection among students and
PLA personnel too.
To prevent disruptive incidents and avoid embarrassment to China’s 
leadership, elevated levels of security were enforced in the period around the 
meetings. Beijing, Tianjin and other cities initiated “stability maintenance”
measures and Chinese State Councillor and Minister of Public Security,
Zhao Kezhi was in Tianjin from February 22 to 23, to supervise the safety 
measures. Li Chunsheng, head of the Guangdong Provincial Public Security
Department, told public security officials in Guangzhou that there were
sensitive anniversaries this year and warned that “hostile forces inside China 
have long marked this year as an important time to implement their plan—
which is a vain attempt—to overthrow our system.”
Enhanced security measures were similarly evident in Tibet because of 
the 60th anniversary this year of the abortive 1959 uprising against Chinese 
rule in Tibet and the 14th Dalai Lama’s flight to India. Tibet was declared 
off-limits to journalists and foreigners for an extended period till April 30 and 
TAR leaders inspected Tibetan Buddhist monasteries and convened a series 
of conferences of security cadres to ‘uncover’ and ‘eliminate’ the ‘double-faced 
cadres’ owing loyalty to the Dalai Lama. Chinese armed police personnel and 
armoured police cars staged a show of force in Lhasa on March 7.
Despite these signs of discontent,the reports presented to the plenary sessions
by Chinese Premier Li Keqiang and CPPCC Chairman Wang Yang bore the
firm imprimatur of Chinese President Xi Jinping and affirmed his authority. 
– 91 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Reports presented to the NPC by Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, the 
Ministry of Finance and National Development and Reform Commission
(NDRC) all opened with acknowledgments of Xi Jinping’s position as
the “core of the Party”. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang’s report contained 15 
references to Xi Jinping and not even one to Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping
or his predecessors. Only Xi Jinping’s political ideology found mention in the 
reports. Of the 15 tasks mentioned in his report, the first two listed following
“the strong leadership of the Party Central Committee with Xi Jinping at the 
core” and “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics in 
the New Era”. The final day too closed with the exhortation, “The Chinese 
nation is in a crucial period of great rejuvenation. We must be more closely
united around the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the 
core.” 
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang took over 100 minutes to read the Report 
on the Work of the Government to the 2,948 NPC Deputies. The 16,160­
word, 44-page report attributed China’s achievements of the past year to the 
leadership of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) “with Xi Jinping at its 
core”. Li Keqiang said, “We owe our achievements of the past year to the 
strong leadership of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping
at its core, to the sound guidance of ‘Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics for a New Era’, and to the concerted efforts of the 
Party, the military, and the people of all ethnic groups in China.” Specifically
endorsing Xi Jinping’s “core position” in the Party, he declared, “We should 
resolutely uphold General Secretary Xi Jinping’s core position on the Party
Central Committee and in the Party as a whole, and resolutely uphold the
Party Central Committee’s authority and its centralized, unified leadership.
And we should maintain a high degree of unity in thought, stance, and action 
with the Party Central Committee, with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, and 
exercise full and rigorous self-discipline in the Party”.
Li Keqiang’s report acknowledged the pressures that China had faced 
the previous year mainly because of the US-initiated ‘tariff war’ and strain in 
Sino-US relations and candidly admitted,“Setbacks in economic globalization,
challenges to multilateralism, shocks in the international financial market, and 
especially the China-US economic and trade frictions, had an adverse effect 
– 92 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SECOND PLENUM OF CHINA’S 13TH NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
on the production and business operations of some companies and on market 
expectations”. Nevertheless, reviewing the previous year’s performance, he 
claimed that the “joint efforts to pursue the Belt and Road Initiative are 
producing a pace-setting effect, cooperation mechanisms for countries along its 
routes are steadily improving, and economic cooperation, trade,and cultural and 
people-to-people exchanges under the Initiative have gathered momentum”.
He also said growth in hi-tech industries and equipment manufacturing had 
outstripped that of other industries and there had been a number of technology
innovations with an average of 18,000 new businesses opening daily.
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang’s report, however, anticipated a tougher 
year ahead. He said, “In pursuing development this year, we will face a graver 
and more complicated environment as well as risks and challenges... that 
are greater in number and size.” He added, “We must be fully prepared for a 
tough struggle.” Indicating that China will nevertheless press ahead with its 
goals, he underscored that “China is still in an important period of strategic 
opportunity”.
In a bid to stimulate the economy, Li Keqiang told NPC delegates that
China would aim to deliver nearly Yuan 2 trillion ($ 298 billion) of cuts in taxes
and other company fees. A Value-Added Tax (VAT) for the transportation and 
construction sectors will be sliced from 10 per cent to 9 per cent, and VAT for 
manufacturers will fall from 16 per cent to 13 per cent. On the concluding day 
of the session on March 15, the National People’s Congress (NPC) passed the
Foreign Investment Law (FIL). The law was fast-tracked as part of efforts to 
appease the US in the ongoing trade negotiations.To ensure its quick passage,
legislators scrapped some of the thornier issues raised in a previous draft, and 
instead passed a relatively vague piece of legislation.The practical implications 
of the law are, therefore, still unknown. However addressing the concerns of
foreign businesses, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang said at his press conference 
(March 15), “The government will introduce a series of matching regulations
and directives to protect the rights and interests of foreign investors.” He 
reiterated, “These will be the important things for the government to do in the 
following weeks and months to see that this law will be truly operable.”
The Report on the Work of the Government took note of the popular
discontent. Li Keqiang said,“There is still public dissatisfaction in many areas such 
– 93 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
as education, health care, elderly care, housing, food and drug safety and income
distribution”. He noted that there are 250 million people over 60 years of age. He
also acknowledged that the difficulties faced by private firms and small and micro
businesses in accessing affordable financing have not been effectively solved.
Highlights of this NPC session included the lowered GDP growth rate
of 6—6.5 per cent for 2019; commitment to provide 11 million new jobs;
reduce rural poverty by 10 million; increasing the national defence budget
by 7.5 per cent to approximately US$ 177.6 billion; and approval of a 5
per cent increase in national security expenditure. Pensions were raised by
5 per cent. There was emphasis on innovation, Research and Development
(R&D), agriculture and food grain production and rural development. An
interesting disclosure was that there are 80 million taxpayers in China.
Li Keqiang stated that the rate of increase of the defence budget was a
“little faster” than the GDP growth and emphasised the need to “realise
the dream of national rejuvenation”!
He also dwelt on military-civil integration and military modernisation.
Unprecedentedly, the Premier’s report admitted that “China faced a 
complicated and challenging domestic and international environment of a 
kind rarely seen in many years, and its economy came under new downward 
pressure”. In an obvious attempt to ease US pressure, his report omitted all 
reference to the hi-technology ‘Made in China-2025’. Similarly, mention 
of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) was buried in a single line in a subparagraph on domestic connectivity.
The Finance Ministry report mentioned that an Individual Tax Law 
is being considered. It reiterated the curbs on ostentation, prohibited the 
purchase of official vehicles and imposed cuts on travel, hospitality, etc. The 
budget for poverty alleviation, a programme personally driven by Chinese 
President Xi Jinping, was increased by 8 per cent to Yuan 126.095 billion 
with particular mention of the TAR and Xinjiang, while Yuan 577.6 billion 
was set aside for infrastructure investment, with Yuan 200 billion for railways
including the Sichuan-Tibet Railway. Other highlights were the 7.4 per cent
increase for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs raising its budget to 62.71 billion 
Yuan and enhancement by 13.4 per cent of the investment in Science and 
Technology (S&T), which now totals Yuan 354.312 billion. 
– 94 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SECOND PLENUM OF CHINA’S 13TH NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
But there was an attempt at dismissing reports on debts incurred by nations 
participating in the BRI. China’s Vice Minister of Commerce, Qian Keming,
said at a press conference (March 9) in Beijing that trade and infrastructure 
strategy was not a “one-way street”. He said, “Historically, the international 
debt problem is an old problem. While some countries’ debts have risen, this 
is the result of long-term accumulation.” Giving the example of Pakistan and 
the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, he said 42 per cent of the country’s 
debt was from multilateral institutions, while “only around 10 per cent” could 
be attributed to China. Referring to criticism of the BRI, he said, “Only those
who need money are willing to borrow. From the perspective of lenders, as long 
as your relationship is good and the funds are safe, then you will be willing to
lend. I don’t think third parties should worry about the borrowers and lenders.”
He added that across Asia, US$1.7 trillion in infrastructure investment was 
needed every year up to 2030, but only half of that amount was being met.
Qian Keming added that the Commerce Ministry would step up economic 
and trade cooperation zones and investment activities overseas to facilitate 
development of the belt and road programme.
NPC Chairman Li Zhanshu delivered the NPC’s annual work report,
which laid out the priorities for the coming year. He said they will continue
to deliberate on the civil code and listed the eight laws presently before
the legislature namely: (i) Amendment No. 11 to the Criminal Law; (ii) 
Basic Healthcare and Health Promotion Law; (iii) Property Tax Law; (iv)
Export Control Law; (v) Community Corrections Law (vi) Civil-Military
Integration Development Law; (vii) Veterans Protection Law; and (viii)
Governmental Sanctions Law. The NPC will also revise six laws: Securities 
Law; Officers in Active Service Law; Military Service Law; People’s Armed
Police Law; Organic Law of the National People’s Congress; and Rules of
procedure of the National People’s Congress. The NPC will additionally
begin studying and drafting the Biological Safety Law and Yangtze River
Protection Law. 
Of these, the most talked about is the Property Tax Law. Observers say if
the government ever introduces a property tax, it will have major ramifications 
for the property market and the larger economy. More importantly, it could 
change the relationship between the citizens and the state. 
– 95 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
On the sidelines of the NPC sessions and probably to make it easier for 
enterprises to access funds, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) Governor Yi
Gang said (March 7), China has cut the ratio of cash that banks must hold 
as reserves five times in the past year, in the face of the weakest economic 
growth in 28 years amid slowing consumption and the trade conflict with
Washington. He revealed that the yuan-dollar exchange rate has been a
subject of discussion in trade talks with Washington. While Yi Gang claimed,
“There has been an obvious increase in support from financial institutions to 
small and private business recently,” PBoC Vice Governor Pan Gongsheng
said the central bank has a goal of increasing loans by large commercial banks 
to small companies by 30 per cent from 2018—a target Premier Li Keqiang
mentioned in his government work report. The central bank also appeared to 
be managing investor expectations on the traditionally risk-free bond market,
with the Deputy Governor saying it’s good to have some defaults. He noted 
there was an increase in bond defaults last year, but the level is still lower than 
in most other countries. [Comment: Chinese officials use the term “56789” to 
refer to the importance of private enterprise. These companies, many of them
small, are said to account for 50 per cent of tax revenue, 60 per cent of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP), 70 per cent of innovation, 80 per cent of urban 
labor, and 90 per cent of the total number of companies in the country.]
Interesting were the comments of Yin Zhongqing, Deputy Director of 
the NPC Financial and Economic Affairs Committee, wherein he cast doubts 
on the accuracy of the economic data furnished by the government. Beijing
News quoted him as saying, at a press conference on March 10, during the
NPC, that the total amount of all local GDP added together is greater than 
the national GDP due to data fraud. He said, “There is a discrepancy between 
regional and national GDP figures and it has negatively affected the credibility
of the government. Some local governments tend to cook their books, inflate 
some statistics, or conceal some data to stand out from the competition.” Yin 
Zhongqing added that a number or factors contribute to data fraud. First,
people do not comply with the law and data fraud persists despite repeated 
crackdowns. Second, local governments, businesses, and residents are 
overburdened with data calls from different government agencies.Third, many 
government agencies apply different standards, resulting in inconsistencies in 
– 96 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SECOND PLENUM OF CHINA’S 13TH NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
the data collected. Fourth, punishment over data fraud is “too light.” Fifth, a 
lot of statistical indicators are still defined according to the planned economy
and do not reflect actual development.
The Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) figured at the NPC. TAR Party
Secretary Wu Yingjie addressed a press conference of 127 foreign and Chinese
journalists. Speaking at the NPC meetings on March 6, in Beijing, the Mayor 
of Lhasa and Deputy Party Secretary of TAR, Go Khok, stated that the TAR 
government had restricted religious activities in Tibet and that the number 
of days spent observing religious events, and the number of people attending
them,both had been reduced to less than 10 per cent.He told Tibetan Deputies
and journalists in the Great Hall of the People, “In 2018, Lhasa … took a 
clear-cut stand in eliminating the negative influence the Dalai Lama exerted 
via religion and took great effort in ridding the passive religious influence.”
The People’s Daily (March 9) reported that Politburo Standing
Committee (PBSC) members Xi Jinping, Li Zhanshu, Wang Yang,
Wang Huning, and Zhao Leji participated in the deliberation sessions
for Fujian, Jiangsu, Tibet, Xinjiang, and Hainan, respectively. Xi Jinping
focussed on fighting poverty, promoting innovation and entrepreneurship,
and strengthening cross-Strait integration. There were specific references
during the NPC session and in Li Keqiang’s report to Taiwan and the
‘1992 consensus’. Li Zhanshu said that the Foreign Investment Law shows 
China’s “clear stance” on pursuing win-win strategies and building an “open
world economy.” Zhao Leji spoke about accelerating plans for Hainan’s 
experimental free trade zone, as well as the importance of strengthening
supervision. Wang Yang and Wang Huning participated in Tibet’s and
Xinjiang’s deliberation sessions, respectively, and emphasised promoting
national unity and stability in each region.
Xi Jinping also attended a plenary meeting of representatives from the 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) and People’s Armed Police (PAP). He said it 
is essential to complete the final tasks of the 13th Five-Year Plan for ‘military 
construction’ by the deadline in 2020. He emphasised that it is necessary to 
strengthen inspection and oversight, including with regard to finance and 
corruption. Speaking about the 14th Five-Year Plan for ‘military construction’,
Xi Jinping said the plan must be adapted to the “strategic requirements” 
– 97 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
of national development, security, and the military. Outlining some of the 
military’s duties, he said they were wide-ranging and included protecting
China’s sovereignty, maintaining social stability, supporting local economic 
and social development, responding to disasters, and helping “impoverished 
villages and people.” CMC Vice Chairman Xu Qiliang chaired the session 
where all members of the CMC, namely, Zhang Youxia, Wei Fenghe, Li 
Zuocheng, Miao Hua and Zhang Shengmin were in attendance.
While relations with foreign countries do not receive much attention at
these meetings, reflecting the tension in the China-India and India-Pakistan
relationships this year, India came in for lengthy mention. On March 13, Global 
Times reported that An Ran, a Deputy to the NPC and Professor at South China
University of Technology in Guangzhou (Guangdong province), had proposed
that the country allow residents in the border area with India to trade to improve
China-India relations, reduce military confrontations and benefit the local
inhabitants. He said this could also showcase the achievements of China’s Tibet 
Autonomous Region to India and other countries. He said that the proposal was
based on field work conducted by a group of researchers from Yunnan University
in Southwest China. Yunnan province borders the Tibet region, Vietnam, Laos
and Myanmar. Professor Guo Jianbin, the group’s team leader, told the Global 
Times that his team went to some counties, including Lhozhag, Lhunze in
Shannan prefecture and Medog and Zayu in the city of Nyingchi, “South Tibet” 
in July and August 2018, and found that because the restrictions of the militaries
of China and India in the illegal “McMahon Line” are “tight, residents in the
border areas are not allowed to cross the line freely”. However, in some areas,
some residents, mainly those from the Lhoba ethnic minority group, have crossed
the “line”to trade. He added,“We found that the villages in the border areas have
wide roads and a clean environment. If China allows residents living on the other
side to trade, all these achievements and developments will help better unite
the residents in border areas.” Separately, Hu Zhiyong, a Research Fellow at the
Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences’ Institute of International Relations, told
the Global Times (March 13) that the move could help deepen understanding
between China and India. He added, “Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi 
may welcome it to gain support in the elections”, however, China should watch
India’s moves as India has been suspicious and hostile toward China. 
– 98 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SECOND PLENUM OF CHINA’S 13TH NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
There were some other interesting, though tangential, references to
the India-China relationship. On the sidelines of the NPC on March 8,
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi claimed that Beijing had played a
“constructive role” in defusing tensions between India and Pakistan over
Pulwama and, referring to the “historic” Wuhan meeting asserted that “the
strategic understandings of our leaders trickle down to our people and
become a common view”. He said that New Delhi and Islamabad should 
“meet each other halfway” to deescalate the crisis. Describing Pakistan
as “China’s iron brother”, Wang Yi said, “China has stressed from the
beginning the need to exercise calm and restraint, prevent an escalation,
find out what has happened, and resolve the matter through dialogue.” He
added, “China hopes that Pakistan and India will transform the crisis into
an opportunity and meet each other halfway. We advise both parties to
quickly turn this page and seek fundamental, long-term improvement in
their relations.” 
Apparently to balance the comments, Xinhua reported that at the same 
press conference, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi spoke in positive terms 
about the India-China relationship. He said China and India should be each 
other’s partner in pursuing their respective dreams and each other’s important 
opportunity for advancing their respective economies. He said the two 
countries should collectively make due contribution to Asia’s revitalisation and 
prosperity. Wang Yi added that the historic meeting between President Xi 
Jinping and Prime Minister Narendra Modi last year has created a new model 
of high-level interactions between the two countries, enhanced the mutual 
trust and friendship of leaders of the two countries, and set the direction 
for future relations. Government departments on both sides have done a 
lot and made considerable progress in following through on many of the
understandings reached by the leaders. Wang Yi said, “The priority now is to
see that the strategic understandings of our leaders trickle down to our people
and become a common view and conscious efforts.” He added that China 
will work with India to comprehensively strengthen pragmatic cooperation
and people-to-people exchanges, so that “our friendship and cooperation will
surge ahead like the Yangtze and the Ganges, giving strong and sustained
impetus to our relationship.” 
– 99 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
The stand-off at Doklam, which seems to still rankle the Chinese, also 
figured obliquely.Discussing China’s military modernisation with two Chinese 
military experts on the state-owned China Global Television Network 
(CGTN),well known Chinese TV anchor Yang Rui referred to Doklam during
his programme on March 16. Earlier on February 15, the state-owned PLA 
Daily reported that 37 NPC Deputies had proposed amendments to China’s
Criminal Law to curb military-related rumours online to protect the image of
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). Jiang Yong, Political Commissar of the 
PLA Beijing Garrison Command and one of the NPC Deputies, specifically
cited, “China offering soft loans of 20 billion yuan ($2.95 billion) to India in
exchange for their retreat” as a “major false rumour.”This rumour which spread 
rapidly across China (and was reported in my article in the Sunday Guardian on 
September 2, 2017) had caused serious concern to China’s leadership. It was,
very unusually, denied at the time by China’s Ministry of National Defence,
its Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) and the CCP’s official mouthpiece,
People’s Daily. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on April 
7, 2020.) 
– 100 – 
15. An Assessment of the 13th Session of 
China’s 13th NPC, May 2020 
China held its ‘Big Two’ —as the plenary sessions of its top advisory body, the 
Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and its version 
of a Parliament, the National People’s Congress (NPC) are called—from May 
21 to May 28, 2020. Annually held in March, the plenary sessions were delayed 
this year because of the coronavirus pandemic. The pandemic’s shadow was 
evident in the caution that the plenum would be shortened to a week instead 
of the usual ten days with restrictions on the number of press conferences and 
correspondents allowed to attend. Provision for video conferencing was, for 
the first time, made for those not physically attending the CPPCC and NPC 
Plenums. 
Reflecting the adverse impact of the coronavirus on China’s economy,
Han Fangming, Vice Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the 
CPPCC National Committee, set the tone for frugality. He said, “Due to 
the COVID-19 epidemic and the shortened session, the accommodation and 
meeting venues for CPPCC members and NPC delegates are simpler, stricter 
and more efficient.” Hotels and meeting rooms for the sessions provided 
curtailed services, with fewer newspapers, and no banners, red carpets, flowers,
bars or cafes. CPPCC members and NPC delegates were asked to bring their 
own pens or notepads, and just a single bottle of water, a tea cup, and a pack of 
antiseptic wipes were provided at the venue. Each member and delegate was 
given a full-page reminder about how to avoid catching the virus or block its 
spreading. ‘Social distancing’ was enforced and attendees were encouraged not 
to shake hands, congregate outside the meeting rooms or linger in confined 
places, as well as not to leave their hotels or the convention areas without 
permission from the organisers.
To burnish the credibility of the CCP which got dented particularly
during the coronavirus pandemic, the state-owned China Central Television 
(CCTV) on the day of the ‘Big Two’ sessions, reported (May 21), that CCP 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
members had donated RMB 8.36 billion (US$ 1.18 billion) for the fight
against the coronavirus in the past three months. It said all the money was
sent to the ‘Party Central Committee’ for redistribution. 
A surprise development intended to shore Chinese President Xi Jinping’s 
position after the spate of personal criticism he was subjected to in the past
few months, including calls for him to step down, was the announcement on 
May 21 that 17 Deputies to the NPC had been asked to resign. Four among
them were senior People’s Liberation Army (PLA) officers who were charged
with “serious violations of discipline and law”. The list of PLA Deputies to
the NPC, which was finalised on May 10, 2020, did not mention their names.
Corruption, which is often listed as one of the charges, was not mentioned 
suggesting that doubts about their political reliability or factionalism could have 
been factors for their dismissal. Two of the officers, Lt Gen Rao Kaixun, the 
former Deputy Commander and Chief of Staff of the PLA Strategic Support 
Force (SSF) and Maj Gen Meng Zhongkang, former Political Commissar of 
the Jiangsu Military District, had outstanding career records. The unexpected
dismissal of the NPC Deputies confirms that Xi Jinping continues to closely
monitor the PLA and the Party for any signs of factionalism or wavering in
political reliability. More importantly, their dismissal would have sent a chill 
through PLA and Party cadres, enabling Xi Jinping to further tighten his grip.
There were some developments, however, that were timed to coincide with 
the opening of the ‘Big Two’ on May 21 and embarrass China’s leadership.
Following the ‘open’ letter posted on WeChat on May 1, listing 15 demands,
43-year old Zhang Xuezhong,a Shanghai-based Chinese constitutional lawyer 
who was subsequently detained, posted an ‘open’ letter addressed to all NPC 
Deputies on WeChat on May 9, calling for reforms and freedom of speech.
Describing China’s governance as very backward, he asked the NPC Deputies 
to create a representative committee to draft a Constitution conforming to
“modern political principles”. He urged the NPC to pass resolutions, which 
enshrine that no political party should enjoy the “status of a national public 
service institution”. Meanwhile, a 20-minute audio recording of retired senior 
Central Party School Professor Cai Xia’s scathing criticism of Xi Jinping and
the CCP circulated widely over the Chinese web for almost a month! This was 
followed by the over 2,000-character essay penned by Xu Zhangrun, former 
– 102 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE 13TH SESSION OF CHINA’S 13TH NPC, MAY 2020 
Professor of Law at Beijing’s prestigious Tsinghua University and who has
near iconic status among China’s academics and intellectuals, advising NPC
Deputies on twelve things they should do. A strident critic of Xi Jinping since
2018, banned from writing and using the social media, Xu Zhangrun had the 
essay published in the Hong Kong magazine Mainland China on May 21.
Xu Zhangrun blamed “the Axlerod [that is, Xi Jinping] and the cabal”
for the rapid spread of the coronavirus across the world and China’s isolation 
globally. In addition to demanding a State Council White Paper investigating
actions taken during the initial stages of the outbreak and especially between 
January 3 and 7, Xu Zhangrun demanded that all officials be required to 
publicly disclose their assets; remove Communist Party cells from all academic 
and educational institutions; enshrine the protection of private property in 
the Constitution and return the right of ownership to the people themselves;
and “eliminate the state-sanctioned monopoly exercised by the Communist 
Party as China’s sole landlord”. It is interesting that critics of Xi Jinping and
the CCP continue to be able to post their criticisms on Chinese social media 
platforms.
Separately, putting the spotlight on the strained US-China relationship,
which is adversely impacting China’s economy and its ‘Two Centenary’ goals,
was the toughly worded 16-page document titled “The United States Strategic
Approach to China” released by the White House on May 20. The document 
effectively restricts engagement with China as US policy. It announced, “Our 
goal is to protect the United States’ vital national interests, as articulated in 
the four pillars of the 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS) of the United
States of America”. With this document, the US government essentially shed 
all pretence of cooperation and engagement with the People’s Republic of
China (PRC) and opted for a competitive approach. It could be the prelude 
to tougher actions against China. Rather interesting is the comment, “Our 
approach is not premised on determining a particular end state for China”,
possibly to assure the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) that the American 
objective is not to destroy it.
Preparatory to the CPPCC and NPC Plenums,Xinhua (May 15) reported 
that the Politburo met on May 15 to discuss the draft of the State Council’s
Government Work Report that Chinese Premier Li Keqiang would present 
– 103 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
to the third meeting of the 13th NPC. Xinhua said the meeting believed that 
in the past year “China’s development has faced many difficult challenges”, but 
“the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core”united all 
the people to overcome difficulties and complete the main goals and tasks of
the year. It said the Party Central Committee has made epidemic prevention 
and control a top priority. The meeting “emphasised that the current global
epidemic situation and the world economic situation are still grim and 
complex, and the challenges facing China’s development are unprecedented”.
It claimed that “to do a good job in the government this year” the “strong
leadership of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at the 
core, and under the guidance of Xi Jinping’s socialist ideology with Chinese
characteristics in the new era” was necessary. It emphasised the importance 
of expanding domestic demand, achieving the goal of tackling poverty, and 
promoting the agricultural harvest and increasing farmers’ incomes.
The South China Morning Post (May 20) said that PLA officers were
pushing for a defence budget hike of 9 per cent, or higher than the 7.5 per
cent increase of last year. Separately, China’s economists were debating in
the run-up to the plenum on whether, in view of the bleak and uncertain 
economic situation, the Government Work Report should at all mention a 
growth rate target. Items assessed as likely to figure in the Premier’s report 
included measures to alleviate distress caused by the pandemic, Chinese 
President Xi Jinping’s ‘Poverty Alleviation’ programme, the huge problem of 
unemployment, and jobs for China’s almost nine million graduates. By March 
2020, the number of unemployed in China had jumped to an estimated over 
70-80 million from approximately 17-20 million in 2019.
Some 2,878 Deputies to the NPC, who included the 290 Deputies 
representing the PLA, assembled in Beijing’s Great Hall of the People from 
May 21 for the week-long plenary sessions. As per practice, the 2,158 CPPCC 
delegates were permitted to sit in the NPC meetings though not vote.
A day before its inaugural session on May 22, the NPC elected a 
174-member presidium, with Wang Chen as Secretary General of the NPC
session. The meeting also adopted the agenda for the session: deliberate 
on the report on the work of the government; review the report on the 
implementation of the 2019 plan and on the draft plan for national economic 
– 104 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE 13TH SESSION OF CHINA’S 13TH NPC, MAY 2020 
and social development in 2020; review the report on the execution of the 
central and local budgets for 2019 and on the draft central and local budgets
for 2020; deliberate on the bill put forward by the NPC Standing Committee 
on reviewing the draft civil code; deliberate on the bill put forward by the 
NPC Standing Committee on reviewing a draft decision of the NPC on 
establishing and improving the legal system and enforcement mechanisms for 
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region to safeguard national security;
deliberate on the work report of the NPC Standing Committee; deliberate on 
the work report of the Supreme People’s Court; and deliberate on the work
report of the Supreme People’s Procuratorate.
The China Daily pointed out that the Draft Civil Code to be deliberated
on by the CPPCC and NPC consists of seven volumes, and includes general
provisions and sections on property, contracts, personality rights, marriage
and family, inheritance and torts. Shi Jiayou, Professor at Renmin University
of China and Executive Director of the National Research Centre of Civil 
and Commercial Law, told the state-owned China Global Television 
Network (CGTN) that compilation of personal rights in a separate volume
is a major development and innovation in the democratic legislation and
civil code. It will help strengthen legal protection of personal dignity and
individual rights.
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang presented the draft of the Government 
Work Report for approval to the NPC on May 22. The report was only 9,500 
(Chinese) characters in length, or half last year’s 16,000-character report.
Predictably, it praised Chinese President Xi Jinping with 13 mentions of him
and his position as “the core” of the CCP. There was no reference to Deng
Xiaoping or Mao Zedong.The report stressed Party discipline and emphasised
that it was the Party’s “strong and courageous” leadership that had enabled
China to face difficulties. The report mentioned the Party 29 times! It was
noticeably temperate in tenor, and subdued while recounting the achievements 
of the past year and listing the tasks for the coming year. Reflecting on the
deleterious impact of the coronavirus pandemic and impending uncertainty, it 
stated that China had promptly shared information about the outbreak of the 
coronavirus.The Belt and Road Initiative received very brief mention, with no 
mention of ‘great’ progress. In his draft report, Li Keqiang omitted to mention 
– 105 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
the word “peaceful” while referring to Taiwan’s reunification, thereby causing
quite a stir. This was rectified in the final version on May 28.
For the first time in 26 years, the report did not set an annual economic 
growth target for Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as it has since 1994. China’s 
economists had been debating for at least the past two months whether to 
specify a target growth rate. Because the economic damage is far higher than
officially acknowledged by China, and factors like the economic uncertainty 
caused by the coronavirus and the growing anti-China sentiment that could
affect China’s exports, the leadership probably decided not to mention a target
which it might not be able to reach. It emphasised the difficulties confronting
China and extended concessions, tax and fee cuts totalling RMB 500 billion
by a year to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and industries 
to help them recover. It said the reduction in electricity prices by 5 per cent
will be extended till the end of the year. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang’s report 
instead prioritised the goals of stabilising employment, alleviating poverty and 
preventing risks in 2020, but again, without mentioning the target dates as it
used to in the past. He said they would create 9 million jobs in the year, a drop
from the previous years’ 11 million despite the huge surge in unemployment.
The budget deficit is slated to rise to Yuan 3.76 trillion (US$ 529 billion)
this year, 36 per cent higher than in 2019, while the target for the deficit as a 
percentage of GDP will increase to “more than 3.6 per cent” from last year’s 
2.8 per cent, exceeding the 3 per cent threshold which has long been seen by
China’s policy-makers as a red line that must not be crossed.
At the press conference after the concluding session of the 13th NPC
on May 28, the People’s Daily (May 28) reported that Chinese Premier Li
Keqiang said that the government would focus its stimulus measures on
domestic economics, while admitting that China is a developing country
with a large population and an average annual per capita disposable income
of Yuan 30,000 (US$ 4,213.30). There are 600 million people—or two out
of every five Chinese—who have low and middle incomes, whose average
monthly income is barely Yuan 1,000 (US$ 140.40). He added, “It may
be difficult even to rent an apartment with an income of 1,000 yuan in
a medium-sized city.” Li Keqiang promised to make people’s livelihood 
a high priority. He said the task of poverty alleviation is a “sophisticated 
– 106 – 
 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE 13TH SESSION OF CHINA’S 13TH NPC, MAY 2020 
commitment” that the CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping has made to the
entire society and it must be completed as scheduled this year. There were
originally five million people living in poverty. Under the impact of the
epidemic, some more people may have fallen back into poverty and the task
of poverty alleviation has become even tougher.
Poverty alleviation is a top priority for Xi Jinping and he has been
emphasising it during his tours outside Beijing since March 2020. The PLA 
too is publicising its efforts in poverty alleviation. China has 52 officially
recognised ‘impoverished counties’ with 551,000 rural impoverished people
concentrated in the central and western regions. The regions comprise to 
the Tibet Autonomous Region, four Tibetan-inhabited provinces and four 
prefectures in the southern Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, while 
the three prefectures are Liangshan Yi Autonomous Prefecture in Sichuan 
province, Nujiang Lisu Autonomous Prefecture in Yunnan province and 
Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture in Gansu province. The official poverty
line in China is about US$ 47 per month or Yuan 4,000 per year and covers 
only about 550,000 people. The Chinese National Bureau of Statistics (NBS)
later commented that most of these 600 million people are migrant workers.
The Finance Minister’s report approved by the NPC revealed that 
budgetary cuts had been imposed on most government departments. Central 
government expenditures are down 0.2 per cent and projected at Yuan 3.5035 
trillion. Highlights of a summary breakdown are: Yuan 172.176 billion on 
general public services, down 13.3 per cent; Yuan 54.305 billion on foreign
affairs, a drop of 11.8 per cent; Yuan 1.268 trillion on national defence, up 6.6 
per cent; Yuan 183.272 billion on public security, up 0.7 per cent; Yuan 169.909 
billion on education, a drop of 7.5 per cent (national spending on education,
which includes local outlays,will increase by 5.4 per cent);Yuan 319.651 billion 
on science and technology, down 9.1 per cent (national spending in this area,
which includes local outlays, will rise by 3.1 per cent); Yuan 121.618 billion on 
stockpiling grain, edible oils, and other materials, up 1 per cent; Yuan 539.943 
billion, on debt interest payments, up 18.2 per cent; Yuan 8.3915 trillion to 
be transferred to local governments, which amount has increased by 12.8 per 
cent, in a new one-time special payment of Yuan 605 billion for the year. This 
is to be used for supporting local governments to ensure security in the six 
– 107 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
areas, with a focus on guaranteeing basic living standards, ensuring normal
functioning of primary-level governments, developing the public health 
system and emergency supply system, and responding to uncertainties in the 
second half of the year.
China’s defence budget was hiked by 6.6 per cent to Yuan 1.268 trillion 
(US$ 178.2 billion) from last year’s allocation of US$ 177.6 billion. The low 
increase is due to the serious disruption to China’s economy by COVID-19.
The state-run Xinhua news agency noted that it is the lowest growth rate in 
recent years. China’s Global Times (May 22) observed that the 6.6 per cent 
rise in the defence budget was lower than the 7.5 per cent of 2019, when 
the defence budget was Yuan 1.19 trillion. It quoted Song Zhongping, a 
Hong Kong-based retired officer of the PLA Second Artillery and a Chinese
military expert and TV commentator, as saying that this year’s 6.6 per cent is
not a significant slowdown in view of the pandemic. He added, however, that 
“China is facing national security threats, including those taking place very
nearby to China and in non-traditional security fields. Compared to these 
threats, China’s military expenditure was far from enough”. Wei Dongxu, a 
Beijing-based military analyst, told the Global Times that the increased defence 
budget can ensure that the Chinese military’s major programmes and key
spending fields are not affected by the pandemic and will remain on schedule.
Unnamed military experts quoted by the Global Times said, “China has huge 
national defence demands, which is a crucial factor in the military budget.
In the post-pandemic period, China faces more military threats from other 
countries, mainly the US. With Taiwan secessionists becoming more and 
more rampant, reunification by force with the island of Taiwan is always on 
the table”, adding that in this situation, “increasing the defence budget must 
not stop”. Song Zhongping said, “People should ask first, which countries are 
threatening China’s national security in the first place? They should ask the US,
they should ask India, and some other neighbouring countries and regions.”
Interesting was the comment of the spokesman of China’s Ministry of
National Defence, Senior Col Wu Qian. He said (May 26), “China’s spending
is still lower than what is needed to protect the nation’s sovereignty, security
and development interests, as well as to carry out its international duties and
fulfil the nation’s development needs. It is thus reasonable and necessary to 
– 108 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE 13TH SESSION OF CHINA’S 13TH NPC, MAY 2020 
keep growing China’s military spending in a moderate and stable manner.” He 
said that on the international level, there is the rise of hegemony and power 
politics, coupled with unilateralism, geopolitical risks and challenges to the 
current global security order and “the world is not that peaceful.”Domestically,
Wu Qian said, China is facing an ever more complex security situation as
the fight against secessionist movements becomes more intensified. The prosecession Democratic Progressive Party in Taiwan is “inviting foreign powers 
to serve its own goals and is going further in its pursuit of separating the 
country.” Security on Chinese soil and of Chinese investments overseas is also 
facing real threats.
During the NPC session, Chinese President Xi Jinping met the Deputies 
representing the PLA/PAP (People’s Armed Police) and from the Nei Mongol
Autonomous Region. Xinhua (May 26) reported that speaking to the PLA/
PAP delegations, Chinese President Xi Jinping appreciated the military’s 
response to the coronavirus outbreak. He said the important contributions of 
the military “once again proved that the people’s Army is a heroic force that 
the Party and people completely trust.” He pointed out that efforts to continue 
national defence and Army construction should proceed in spite of the novel 
coronavirus pandemic, highlighting the need to “accelerate the preparation for
battles, flexibly carry out actual-combat military training, and comprehensively
raise the capabilities of our forces to carry out military missions.” He said the 
battle against the novel coronavirus served as a barometer for the effectiveness 
of the military’s reforms and placed new requirements for reform on the 
military. Xi Jinping exhorted the delegates to “complete the designated 
reform tasks on time” and, in response to new issues that surfaced because 
of the outbreak, he “emphasized resolution [of new issues] using thoughts
and methods based on reform and innovation.” Xi Jinping specifically stressed 
the need to improve military medical research, strengthen national defence
technological innovation, and cultivate talent—particularly through the
“three-in-one” (йս—փ) training system. The military should “support 
local economic and social development and winning the tough battle against 
poverty and assist local [authorities] in doing well the work of maintaining 
overall social stability.” Xi Jinping told the delegates to accelerate Research 
and Development (R&D) of COVID-19 drugs and vaccines. According to 
– 109 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Xinhua, Xi Jinping told them that “the world is an increasingly dangerous 
place” and “the epidemic has brought a profound impact on the global
landscape and on China’s security and development as well.” He ordered 
the military to think about worst-case scenarios, scale up training and battle 
preparedness, promptly and effectively deal with all sorts of complex situations
and resolutely safeguard national sovereignty, security and development
interests. Conscious of the low rise in the national defence budget, Xi Jinping
told PLA officers not to take the money for granted and that “every penny 
must be well spent to produce maximum results.” In conclusion, Xi Jinping 
called upon various levels of the Party and government to support national 
defence and military construction. Among those who attended the meeting 
were Central Military Commission (CMC) Vice-Chairmen Xu Qiliang and
Zhang Youxia, as well as CMC members Wei Fenghe, Li Zuocheng, Miao 
Hua, and Zhang Shengmin.
Deputies from the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) led by TAR Party
Secretary Wu Yingjie and including China’s Minister of Public Security Zhao
Kezhi, participated in the NPC sessions. State Councillor and Minister of 
Public Security Zhao Kezhi, who was a Deputy to the NPC representing
the TAR, said, “We must do our best on the anti-separatism campaign and
the implementation of various measures to maintain stability, strengthen
infrastructure construction of stability, make preparations for a longterm struggle.” At the TAR NPC delegation’s review meeting on May 23,
TAR Party Secretary Wu Yingjie said that they should “strive to open up 
a new era of rapid development of Tibet and a new situation of long-term
stability.” He said they must “embody absolute loyalty to General Secretary
Xi Jinping and the Party Central Committee with practical actions.” TAR 
delegates to the NPC and CPPCC session submitted nine proposals focussed
on socioeconomic infrastructure development and ecological environment 
protection. Three proposals were: “Suggestions on Supporting Operation and
Maintenance of Heating Projects in Tibet,” “Suggestions on Supporting the
Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Oxygen Supply Projects in
High Altitude Areas in Tibet”; and “Proposal on Increasing Investment to 
Support the Construction of the Tibet Desertification Control Project.”There 
were six proposals from individual Deputies on: (i) “Supporting Lhasa to be 
– 110 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE 13TH SESSION OF CHINA’S 13TH NPC, MAY 2020 
Built as the Frontier Central City”; (ii) “Accelerating the Implementation of
the Ecological Restoration and Comprehensive Management of Nyangchu
(Chinese: Niyang) River”; (iii) “Approving the Master Plan of the Yarlung
(Chinese: Yalong) River Scenic Area for Boosting Cultural and Eco-tourism”;
(iv) “Further Strengthening the Capacity Building of Primary Medical and 
Health Services in Tibet”; (v) “Leading the High-Quality Development of the
Power Industry in the 14th Five-Year Plan,”; and (vi) “Further Strengthening
the Capacity Building of Primary Medical and Health Services in Tibet.”
A number of Deputies made suggestions at the NPC.A few are highlighted:
(i) Cao Jingyi, a Deputy to the NPC and Research Director with the PLA 
Navy Academy, said that her team has extensively researched and offered 
strategic suggestions to the PLAN on its requirements for AI-based future 
naval warfare. She added that her team is also committed to tackling existing
practical problems in upgrading corrosion prevention of naval equipment and
the application of advanced materials and had undertaken more than 110 
scientific research tasks and taken the lead in launching a special corrosion 
control project of the PLA naval equipment in 2019. It has done research 
on the application of new-generation materials to vessel structure and laid 
a solid foundation for the development and building of future naval vessels.
She said, “The corrosion issue has become the number one killer that triggers
equipment failures and accidents, the biggest headache that pulls down 
combat readiness and maintenance capabilities, and the number one enemy
that affects the quick reaction and strategic deployment of equipment. This 
issue implies lasting combat on an invisible battlefield” . (ii) Zhang Chuanwei,
a Deputy to the NPC who is also the chairman of Mingyang Smart Energy,
a wind turbine manufacturer and clean energy integrated solution provider 
based in South China’s Guangdong province, proposed on May 23 that China
should accelerate the pace in the adjustment of its energy structure to shape 
a clean energy support belt around the sea by building multiple wind power 
projects on the sea. He recommended that China should build up and multiply
the “Three Gorges projects on the sea”, which focusses on wind power in the 
ocean-based Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) 12 to 200 nautical miles in 
the South China, East China, Yellow and Bohai Seas. (iii) Zhao Xiaojin, Party
chief of the China Academy of Space Technology (CAST) and a member 
– 111 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
of the 13th CPPCC National Committee, said (May 23) that the Chinese
space industry insiders are considering using the country’s upcoming space
station as a facility for large-scale space-borne biology experiments in order to 
constantly increase China’s ability to safeguard its biosecurity.He also disclosed 
that China plans to send two more advanced Earth observation satellites from 
the Gaofen satellite family in 2020, and will conduct a Mars sample return 
mission by around 2030, as well as a Jovian system probe mission. And (iv)
China’s Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Han Changfu commented,
“I can definitely say that China will have no food crisis, with absolute grain 
security” which stirred a discussion on China’s microblog platform Weibo on 
May 23 with some Chinese netizens saying that China’s grain storage could
sustain the country for more than one year. Han Chanfu’s comments came at 
a time when many grain exporting countries around the world have stopped 
or reduced their exports amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
The China Youth Daily (May 28) reported that the final version of the 
Government Work Report contained 89 revisions to the version delivered by
the Chinese Premier on May 22. It noted that an important addition to the 
Taiwan section of the report was made, namely: “Adhere to the one-China 
principle and promote the peaceful development of cross-strait relations on 
the basis of the ‘1992 Consensus’”. It is curious that the word “peaceful” was 
omitted in the draft version of the Government Work Report, causing quite a 
stir among observers, despite the draft having been approved by the Politburo! 
The plenary session of the 13th National People’s Congress (NPC)
officially closed in Beijing on May 28, 2020, and Li Zhanshu, PBSC member 
and Chairman of the NPC Standing Committee, delivered the closing speech.
At the meeting, the NPC voted to pass the Government Work Report, the 
“Civil Code”, and the “Hong Kong Version of the National Security Law”.
The “Hong Kong Version of the National Security Law”, was passed with
2,878 votes, with one vote against and six abstentions. Li Zhanshu said at 
the meeting that the adoption of the “Hong Kong Version of the National 
Security Law” is a major measure to implement the spirit of the Fourth 
Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party of
China and adhere to, and improve, the “one country, two systems” system.
It is in compliance with the Constitution and the Basic Law of the Hong 
– 112 – 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE 13TH SESSION OF CHINA’S 13TH NPC, MAY 2020 
Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) and includes Hong Kong 
compatriots and the fundamental interests of all the Chinese people. The 
meeting also voted to approve the implementation of the 2019 central and
local budgets and the 2020 central and local budgets, and approve the 2020 
central budget. The meeting adopted a resolution on the work report of the 
Standing Committee of the 13th National People’s Congress, a resolution on 
the work report of the Supreme People’s Court, and a resolution on the work 
report of the Supreme People’s Procuratorate.
Efforts by the authorities prior to the NPC to promote the images of the
CCP and Chinese President Xi Jinping pointed to popular dissatisfaction not
having abated. Fairly strident criticism of Xi Jinping and the CCP, together
with demands for reform still appeared on the Chinese web, probably to the
discomfiture of the leadership. Interesting is that criticism of the CCP and Xi 
Jinping managed to get posted on China’s social media platforms like WeChat 
and Weibo despite the intensive cyber security measures. Chinese Premier Li 
Keqiang’s report to the NPC frankly projected that uncertain and tough times
lie ahead. It was temperate in tenor and devoid of the usual hype regarding 
progress on the Belt and Road Initiative, other international initiatives or 
China’s economic successes. It hinted at the leadership’s inability to provide 
jobs for the huge numbers of unemployed or achieve poverty alleviation 
targets. Li Keqiang’s report praised Xi Jinping and his leadership, but at 
the same time, hinted that China’s leadership is aware that extant popular
dissatisfaction could grow. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on June 
16, 2020.) 
– 113 – 
16. China’s Military and the National People’s 
Congress 
The annual plenary meetings (May 21 -28), of China’s top political advisors 
who comprise the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference 
(CPPCC) and Deputies to the National People’s Congress (NPC)—China’s 
version of a Parliament—in Beijing, are important events that give an insight 
into China’s economic situation, plans for the coming year and the thinking 
of China’s leadership. Commonly called the ‘Big Two’, the list of People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) delegates attending the event yields clues as to 
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership’s areas of emphasis in the 
military as do their discussions. The recently concluded 13th session of the 
13th NPC and 3rd session of the 13th CPPCC have been no different. 
As per practice, Chinese President Xi Jinping, who is also Chairman of 
the Central Military Commission (CMC) and Commander-in-Chief of the 
PLA, met the PLA Deputies. Xinhua (May 26) reported that he appreciated 
the military’s response to the coronavirus outbreak and said the important 
contributions of the military “once again proved that the people’s Army is a 
heroic force that the Party and people completely trust.” He told them that 
“the world is an increasingly dangerous place” and that “the epidemic has 
brought a profound impact on the global landscape and on China’s security 
and development as well.” He ordered the military to “think about worst-case 
scenarios, scale up training and battle preparedness, promptly and effectively 
deal with all sorts of complex situations and resolutely safeguard national 
sovereignty, security and development interests.” Xi Jinping also asked the 
military to “support local economic and social development and winning the 
tough battle against poverty, and assist local [authorities] in doing well the 
work of maintaining overall social stability.”The hike in China’s defence budget 
by the lowest increment in recent years of only 6.6 per cent to US$ 178.2 
billion, elicited some negative comments. Hong Kong-based retired officer of 
the PLA Second Artillery, now renamed the PLA Rocket Force, and prolific 
 
CHINA’S MILITARY AND THE NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
commentator on China’s state-owned TV and media, Song Zhongping, said,
“China is facing national security threats, including those taking place very
nearby to China and in non-traditional security fields. Compared to these 
threats, China’s military expenditure was far from enough”. The Global Times 
quoted unnamed military experts as saying, “In the post-pandemic period,
China faces more military threats from other countries, mainly the US. With 
Taiwan secessionists becoming more and more rampant, reunification by force 
with the island of Taiwan is always on the table”, adding that “in this situation,
increasing the defence budget must not stop”. With this as the backdrop,
Xi Jinping told the PLA officers not to take the money for granted: “Every
penny must be well spent to produce maximum results.” Exhibiting apparent 
confidence in the PLA, he asked them to accelerate research and development
of COVID-19 drugs and vaccines.
Interesting was that through the entire week’s deliberations of the 
CPPCC and NPC, none of the delegates was reported by China’s official 
media as having made any reference to the tensions along the Line of Actual 
Control (LAC) between India and China. Chinese President Xi Jinping made 
no reference to the tension on the LAC and neither did Chinese Foreign
Minister Wang Yi at his press conference on the sidelines of the NPC 
meeting on May 24. The solitary comment mentioning India was by a Hong
Kong-based retired officer of the PLA Second Artillery, now renamed the 
PLA Rocket Force, and a frequent commentator on China’s state-owned TV 
and media like the Global Times. Commenting on China’s defence budget,
Song Zhongping was quoted by the Global Times (May 22) as saying, “People
should ask first, which countries are threatening China’s national security in
the first place? They should ask the US, they should ask India, and some other 
neighbouring countries and regions.”
The other surprise development was the announcement on May 21 that
17 Deputies to the NPC had been asked to resign. Among them were four 
senior PLA officers who were ordered to resign, including as NPC Deputies,
due to “serious violations of discipline and law”. Investigations of the four had 
started earlier between August and December last year but the list of PLA 
Deputies to the NPC, which was finalised on May 10, 2020, did not mention 
their names. Corruption, which is often listed as one of the charges, was not 
– 115 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
mentioned, suggesting that possibly doubts about their political reliability or
factionalism could have been the factors for their dismissal. 
The PLA officers are: Lt Gen Rao Kaixun,the former Deputy Commander
and Chief of Staff of the PLA Strategic Support Force (SSF); Maj Gen Meng
Zhongkang, former Political Commissar of the Jiangsu Military District;
Maj Gen Xu Xianghua, the former Deputy Commander of the Army in
the Western Theatre Command; and Maj Gen Ye Qing, the former Political 
Commissar of the Hainan Military Region.
At least two of them were decorated officers with good records. Lt Gen
Rao Kuixun, born in April 1964, was an officer on the fast, upward mobile
track and had received rapid promotions. He was appointed Commander
of a Group Army at the age of 48, becoming the youngest Group Army
Commander at that time. He was honoured as an “excellent commanding
officer of the PLA Army” in 2008. Rao Kuixun was also the first Deputy
Commander and Chief of Staff of the newly formed PLA Strategic Support
Force (SSF). He was ordered to resign from his post by the SSF Party
Committee on July 31.
The second officer was Maj Gen Meng Zhongkang. He was born in April 
1961, in Zhuji, Zhejiang, and studied at the X’ian Politics College. He trained 
at the Shijiazhuang Army Command College, Nanjing Political College
Shanghai Branch and graduated from the National Defence University. In 
1998, he led a team to Liaohe to fight against the floods. In 2006, he travelled 
with a PLA delegation on a study tour to Britain and the Southeast Asian 
countries. At the time he resigned from service, he was Political Commissar 
of the Jiangsu Military Region. Maj Gen Meng Zhongkang was awarded the 
‘third-class merit’ five times. 
The remaining two officers were Maj Gen Xu Xianghua and Maj Gen
Ye Qing. Born in Haian in Jiangsu province in May 1965, Xu Xianghua was 
promoted to the rank of Major General in December 2014. Maj Gen Ye Qing
was born in August 1962, in Hebei. He served in the 65th Group Army and
as Political Commissar of the Shanxi Jinzhong Army Division and Deputy
Director of the Political Department of the Shanxi Provincial Military Region.
When he was asked to resign he was the Political Commissar of the Hainan 
Military Region. 
– 116 – 
CHINA’S MILITARY AND THE NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
The unexpected dismissal of the four Generals further confirms that Xi 
Jinping continues to closely monitor the PLA and the Party for any signs of
factionalism or wavering in political reliability. More importantly, announcing
the dismissal of the two decorated senior officers on the eve of the NPC would 
have sent a chill through the PLA officer cadre, thereby enabling Xi Jinping to
further tighten his grip on the PLA.
The PLA Deputies to the NPC were divided into nine panels on May 22,
to discuss the Government Work Report presented to the NPC by Chinese 
Premier Li Keqiang. Central Military Commission (CMC) Vice Chairmen 
Gen Xu Qiliang and Gen Zhang Youxia led the discussions. Gen Xu Qiliang
urged the PLA’s NPC Deputies to actively make suggestions and respond to
the concerns of all the service members by focussing on national defence and
military modernisation, and highlighting important issues concerning reform,
development and stability of the nation. Addressing ideological issues, he said 
that the CCP “Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core, has 
won the heartfelt trust and support of the whole Party and the whole Army in
successfully responding to a series of risk challenges, and the great rejuvenation 
of the Chinese nation is moving forward with perseverance”. He urged
the whole Army to further enhance the “four consciousnesses”, strengthen
the “four self-confidences”, achieve the “two safeguards”, implement the 
responsibility system of the Chairman of the Centre Military Commission, 
and always maintain a high degree of ideological and political action with the 
Party Central Committee, the Central Military Commission and Chairman 
Xi. Xu Qiliang emphasised the necessity of strengthening the fighting spirit,
adhering to the “bottom line thinking”, deepening military training and 
preparing for war, being ready to respond to various emergencies at any time,
and resolutely completing the mission of the “new era” entrusted to it by the 
Party and the people.
Gen Zhang Youxia asserted that the “hard-won major achievements in 
Party, country, and Army building since last year are fundamentally led by
Chairman Xi as the Party’s central nucleus and the whole Party’s nucleus”. 
He said, “The whole Army should thoroughly implement Xi Jinping’s 
thinking on strengthening the Army” and firmly implement the instructions 
of the Chairman of advancing the reform and development of Army 
– 117 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
building, maintaining the ‘bottom line’ for security and supporting economic
development, the fight against poverty, and preventing and controlling the
epidemic. He repeated the call for “thoroughly eliminating the effects of Guo 
Boxiong, Xu Caihou, Fang Fenghui, and Zhang Yang, so that the troops can 
feel the new effects of the change in style”.
Based on its interviews with PLA Deputies to the NPC on the opening
day (May 21) of the NPC Plenum, the PLA Daily highlighted that they had
emphasised “the Party’s absolute leadership over the Army” and said that “the 
soul of a strong Army is stronger, and the core maintenance is more firm”. It 
said a constant theme in their comments was that the “PLA is loyal to the
Party and is always ready to go to battle”. Referring to CMC Chairman Xi
Jinping, they “agreed that the ship is heavy and has one helm”.
During the panel discussions, the PLA Deputies disclosed that military 
strategy guidelines of the new era were being implemented in-depth and that
there had been major advancements in military training and preparations, and 
a “comprehensive strengthening of actual combat military training”. They said
the PLA is more cohesive and its morale is high. The mobilisation order for 
training issued by Xi Jinping for three years in a row had, they said, established 
a clear direction for military training and stimulated enthusiasm and creativity
to intensify actual combat military training. The Deputies emphasised that
‘joint training’ and ‘confrontation’ drills were becoming the norm. 
A sampling of the comments by the PLA Deputies to the NPC is given 
below: 
R5 Zhang Xuefeng, Deputy Commander of the PLA Eastern Theatre 
Command Army, who often visits the grassroots units said that “achieving
the Party’s goal of strengthening the Army in the new era and building a 
world-class Army in an all-round way will also require the leadership core 
to lead the helm”. He asserted that “this understanding has already been
deeply rooted in people’s hearts” …. And “the officers and soldiers of the 
Army are full of deep feelings for President Xi, and maintain the core”. 
R5	 Lu Lingbao, NPC Deputy from the People’s Armed Police (PAP),
described the report as very distinctive because it “sticks to the peoplecentered development thinking throughout, and it reflects the Party’s and 
government’s love for the people”. 
– 118 – 
CHINA’S MILITARY AND THE NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
R5	 Miao Runqi, NPC Deputy representing the Air Force Command 
Academy, observed that the government work report had pointed out that
important progress has been made in national defence and Army building
and that the PLA “demonstrated the excellent style of listening to the
Party’s command, being eager to follow orders, and bravely shouldering
heavy burdens during the epidemic situation”. He said this was “basically
the Party’s absolute leadership over the PLA”. Miao Runqi added, “It is 
fundamentally the strong leadership of the Party Central Committee,
with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core, and it is fundamentally the scientific 
guidance of Xi Jinping’s socialist ideology with Chinese characteristics 
in the new era”. He called for applying the spiritual achievements in the 
fight against the epidemic to “build the spiritual power to educate people
and prepare for war”. 
R5	 Liu Shilei, NPC Deputy and Researcher at the Academy of Military
Sciences, said she believes that a strong Army should be strong in
science and technology, with strong scientific talent, as this would 
promote military reforms. Stating that reform and innovation systems 
are particularly conducive to the development of scientific research, she 
recommended building a network of laboratories across the country to 
systematise scientific and technological forces and contribute to national 
construction. Liu Shilei expressed satisfaction that despite the difficulties, 
the state will still increase its investment in scientific research, which will 
definitely greatly encourage the military, scientific research staff. 
R5	 Cao Jingyi, a Deputy to the NPC and Research Director with the PLA 
Navy Academy, in a recent interview, said that her team has extensively 
researched and offered strategic suggestions to the People’s Liberation 
Army Navy (PLAN) on its requirements for Artificial Intelligence (AI)­
based future naval warfare. She added that her team is also committed 
to tackling existing practical problems in upgrading corrosion prevention 
of naval equipment and the application of advanced materials. She said 
her team had undertaken more than 110 scientific research tasks and 
taken the lead in launching a special corrosion control project of the PLA 
naval equipment in 2019. It has achieved some progress on the corrosion 
prevention and control front, it has completed the comprehensive 
– 119 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
demonstration of the research on the new-generation materials’application 
to vessel structure and laid a solid foundation for the development and
building of future naval vessels. She said, “The corrosion issue has become 
the number one killer that triggers equipment failures and accidents, the 
biggest headache that pulls down combat readiness and maintenance 
capabilities, and the number one enemy that affects the quick reaction 
and strategic deployment of equipment. This issue implies lasting combat
on an invisible battlefield”. 
R5	 Wang Jianguo, NPC Deputy representing the Strategic Support Force,
emphasised that promoting the development of national defence science
and technology innovation is an urgent task. Xi Jinping, he recalled,“often 
said that core technology cannot be bought and must be developed on
its own”. He said this must be done quickly, including building adequate
talent and construction of laboratories, software, new processes, and new 
materials. 
R5	 Yang Zheng, Commander of the Hainan Military Region, said improving
the national defence mobilisation system includes leadership management,
the national defence mobilisation organisation and the command system.
He observed that for strengthening the provincial military region system,
it is important to give the reserve force system for national defence 
mobilisation thorough practical training. Other representatives of the 
national defence mobilisation system stressed the importance of “always 
making the military, government, and civilians unite as a rock”. 
R5	 Xiu Zhizhi, NPC Deputy and Political Commissar of the Chongqing
Armed Police Corps, said, “I am particularly encouraged” by the National 
Security Law for Hong Kong. It is timely and of great significance. He 
stressed the importance of maintaining and implementing the “one 
country, two systems” concept.
R5	 Jiang Jianyu, NPC Deputy and Political Commissar of the Hunan Armed 
Police Corps, said the changes occurring today have “not been seen in 
a hundred years” and that “the People’s Army had comprehensively and
thoroughly implemented the responsibility system of the Chairman 
of the Military Commission” He added, “The most important thing
for Chairman Xi Jinping’s command is to do a good job in training 
– 120 – 
CHINA’S MILITARY AND THE NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS 
and preparing for war, keep an eye on strong opponents, improve core 
military capabilities, and always maintain a high level of alertness on the 
string, ensuring that the Party Central Committee, the Central Military
Commission, and Chairman Xi Jinping are able to win decisively and not
insult the mission.” 
R5	 Zhang Hongying, NPC Deputy representing the CMC Joint Staff
Department, recalled the CMC work meetings in January 2019 and
November 2019 when President Xi Jinping emphasised that it is 
necessary to focus on actual combat military training and improve the 
quality and level of military preparations. He had called for enhancing
combat effectiveness and strengthening the thinking of combat teams.
He said the conferences had prompted officers and soldiers to carry out
military training and preparations throughout the year to strengthen the
military, which is the key to be able to fight and win battles.
R5	 Xie Zhengyi, NPC Deputy of the PLA Army said that training is now 
more practical, and since the last year, mass military and cross-regional
training activities, chemical training, joint special training and actual
military confrontation exercises had improved the Army’s military 
preparations.
R5	 Zang Jihui, NPC Deputy and Political Commissar of the PLA 
Northern Theatre Command commented that equipment upgrade 
and transformation is at a critical stage and that mechanisation will be 
basically achieved by 2020. He said that significant progress will be made 
in building ‘informationisation’ and strategic capabilities.
R5	 Wu Changde, member of the CPPCC and former Deputy Director of 
the CMC Political Work Department, emphasised that job security for 
veterans is critical to maintain social stability and is also important for 
stabilising and boosting the military’s will and morale and strengthening
national defence and military development. He called for education and 
guidance on a variety of subjects for the veterans so that there could be 
high-quality and full employment for them. 
R5	 Narbakzhu, a Tibetan NPC Deputy representing lower-level troops of
the Army, said, “We Tibetan people will not forget the kindness of the
Communist Party from generation to generation.Witnesses of the people’s 
– 121 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
happy life, we resolutely listen to the Party ’s command and sincerely 
support Chairman Xi Jinping.” He added, “Listening to President Xi’s
command, being responsible to President Xi, and letting President Xi rest 
assured have become the loudest vows and firmest determination of the 
Generals of the whole Army!”
R5	 A representative from the CMC Training and Management Department 
told reporters that many troops have formed different types of commando
teams to push forward the annual major military tasks. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on June 
5, 2020.) 
– 122 – 
17. No Change in Chinese President Xi Jinping’s 
Assertive Policies Despite Pressure 
Since more than the past 18 months Chinese President Xi Jinping and the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) have been under increasing pressure 
because of the US-China tariff war. Washington has also been trying to 
create an adverse international environment for China. The recent troubles 
in Hong Kong, blamed by the official Chinese media as the handiwork of 
hostile foreign forces, are additionally problematic. Domestically too, the 
cost of living is rising and China’s economy has been slowing down, thereby 
contributing to increased unemployment and sparking worker unrest. There is 
dissatisfaction among academics and students who, since the National People’s 
Congress (NPC) session in March 2019, have, at assured personal risk, spoken 
out publicly against Xi Jinping’s policies. So have, quite unusually, former 
senior Party cadres, a couple of members of the Chinese People’s Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and a few ‘princelings’, suggesting that 
cohesiveness in the upper echelons of the Party leadership is fragile. Despite 
this, Xi Jinping has not modulated either the increasingly stringent domestic 
policies or his assertive and, at times aggressive, foreign policy.
Recent events illustrate that China will continue to follow its assertive 
policies. The South China Sea, of which China claims over 3 million sq km,
remains at the centre of China’s efforts. Since Xi Jinping took over as President,
China has been aggressively moving to militarise islands and islets in the South 
China Sea—portions of which are also claimed by six other countries—and 
establish its claim. In the process, China has deployed its military and missiles 
on seven of them. Notwithstanding Xi Jinping’s commitment in 2015 to not 
militarise these features, China has persisted in its actions. Revealing in this 
context are the disclosures recently in two official Chinese publications.
Qiu Shi, the Party’s leading fortnightly theoretical journal, in its April 
16 issue, published an article authored jointly by the People’s Liberation 
Army Navy (PLAN) Commander Vice Admiral Liu Shijong and the PLAN 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Political Commissar Vice Admiral Qin Shengxiang to mark the 70th founding
anniversary of the PLAN. Reviewing the PLAN’s achievements over the 
years, the article revealed that President Xi Jinping has been promoting the 
construction projects on certain islands and reefs in the South China Sea “with 
a firm will”, which has “changed the strategic situation of military struggle
at sea and demonstrated the steadfast determination to fight for every inch
of territorial land and waters within China’s sovereignty”. Observing that on
April 23, 2018, China unveiled a monument to mark its construction work
on Yongshu Reef, Nansha Islands, the article said President Xi Jinping had
announced the decision to establish China’s first overseas military base in
Djibouti.
The present stand-off between China and Vietnam similarly shows 
that despite being under pressure, China is unwilling to suspend its quest
for domination of the South China Sea. While the respective Communist 
Parties exchange visits and talk of fraternal ties, tension is high in the waters
of the South China Sea where China has questioned Vietnam’s claim. Reports 
confirm that the Chinese survey ship Haiyang Dizhi conducted seismic 
surveys of Vietnam’s exclusive economic zone for ten days from July 12. It was 
escorted by at least three escort ships including a 12,000- ton China Coast
Guard cutter, with a helicopter and another 2,200-ton Coast Guard ship.
While neither country has officially confirmed the stand-off, in the last few 
days, people on Vietnam’s social media have criticised Vietnamese leaders for 
being submissive to China.
China has also not stopped pressing its territorial claims with Japan.There 
have been repeated violations of air space by People’s Liberation Army Air
Force (PLAAF) aircraft over the Miyako Strait and Bashi Channel. Recently,
on July 23, two PLAAF Xian H-6K long-range bombers and two Russian Air 
Force Tupolev Tu-95MS strategic bombers for the first time ever, flew together 
over the Dokdo Islet, violating South Korea’s Air Defence Identification Zone 
(ADIZ). Interestingly, the Dokdo Islet, called Takeshima by Japan, is also 
claimed by Russia.
China has, at the same time been steadily increasing diplomatic, political 
and military pressure on Taiwan to accept the ‘1992 consensus’. The PLAAF 
aircraft have overflown the Taiwan Strait and circled around Taiwan while 
– 124 – 
NO CHANGE IN CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING’S ASSERTIVE POLICIES DESPITE PRESSURE 
PLAN warships including China’s aircraft carrier have, in a show of strength,
sailed through the Taiwan Strait. Between June 29 and July 3, China test-fired 
a series of DF-21 anti-ship, medium-range ballistic missiles into a 22,000 sq
km bloc of the South China Sea, between the disputed Paracel and Spratly
Island groups. Beijing seems to have assessed that it has adequate military 
capability to deter the US from coming to Taiwan’s aid. This calculation has 
led to instances of brinkmanship by the PLAN against US Navy vessels sailing
in the area. 
Separately and more recently, China’s Defence White Paper entitled
“China’s National Defence in the New Era”, released in the midst of the USChina tension on July 24, 2019, included a candid assertion of future intent.
Describing itself as “the only major country yet to be completely reunified, and 
one of the countries with the most complex peripheral security environment”,
it said that “China faces serious challenges in safeguarding national sovereignty,
territorial integrity, and maritime rights and interests”. The observation that 
China is “the only major country yet to be completely reunified” clearly hints 
at the ‘China Dream’ and points to China’s long-term future plans and likely
policy on settlement of outstanding border and territorial disputes. This is of 
direct relevance to India with which China has territorial disputes as well as 
China’s other neighbours like Taiwan, Japan and Vietnam.
Intrusions by Chinese armed forces across the Line of Actual Control 
(LAC) between India and China need to be viewed in this backdrop and, as 
candidly stated in the White Paper, as part of China’s ambition to ‘completely’ 
reunify the country. The lengthy confrontation at Doklam, is suggested in this 
White Paper on Defence, as yet unfinished business.The recent ‘demonstration’ 
by Chinese personnel at Demchok in Ladakh,coinciding with the Dalai Lama’s 
birthday on July 6, is similarly deliberate. On this occasion, the Chinese action 
combined the issue of the Dalai Lama with that of the India-China border 
for the first time, indicating a shift in Beijing’s policy. It presages potentially
increased pressure on India on the issue of the Dalai Lama and the Central 
Tibetan Administration in the days to come and certainly after the 14th Dalai 
Lama is no longer on the scene.
These actions, as well as the rejection of the US-proposed draft agreement 
carried back to Beijing by Vice Premier Liu He in mid-May, show that 
– 125 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Chinese President Xi Jinping and the CCP Central Committee are unwilling 
to compromise with Washington on issues they consider as affecting national
interest. Additionally, Xi Jinping has apparently calculated that he will 
press ahead with his ambition of the ‘reunification’ of China, especially as 
he perceives that some of the countries that have problems with China are 
close to the US. China under Xi Jinping has obviously decided to last out the
Trump Administration -- though this may entail managing his administration
through another term. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on July 
26, 2020.) 
– 126 – 
18. CCP CC’s 4th Plenum Could Suggest a Dilution 
in Xi Jinping’s Authority 
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) held the long overdue 4th plenary 
session of its 19th Central Committee (CC) from October 28–31, 2019. Held 
after a delay of nearly 20 months, the 4th Plenum took place at a time of 
some uncertainty in China, indicated also by speculative reports suggesting 
that the Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) could be expanded with the 
addition of a couple of new members. This speculation, which claimed that 
the induction of new members would signal a political setback for Xi Jinping,
proved erroneous. However, while the plenum communique unequivocally
emphasised the Party’s importance in all spheres it, along with the Plenum 
Resolution issued on November 5 evening, did contain a hint that possibly Xi 
Jinping’s power has been slightly diluted.
The 6,153-character communique issued promptly after the plenum 
concluded on October 31, mentioned that 202 full members and 169 alternate 
members attended. Also attending the plenum were members of the Standing 
Committee of the Central Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC), senior 
officials of relevant departments, a number of delegates to the 19th Party 
Congress who work at the grassroots level, as well as experts and scholars.
The state-owned China Central Television (CCTV) showed Chinese Vice 
President Wang Qishan arriving for the plenum meeting at the Great Hall of 
the People along with the members of the PBSC. The 271 full and alternate 
members of the CCP CC were accommodated, as usual, in the Jingxi Hotel 
managed by the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), for greater security. 
Some Chinese commentators have observed that the prompt issue of 
the plenum communique by the official Chinese media on the day that the 
plenary session ended, showed that it had been finalised prior to the start of 
the plenum. This showed also that differences had been ironed out before the 
start of the plenary meeting. Noticeable too is that after publication of the 
communique, no local officials have yet made statements in their local media. 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
The plenum filled the two vacancies occasioned by the dismissal in January
of Liu Shiyu from the post of Chairman of the China Securities Regulatory
Commission and the death of Zheng Xiaosong, China’s former top official in
Macau who fell to his death in 2018, from among the alternate members of the
CC.Those elevated were Ma Zhengwu, Chairman of state-owned investment 
conglomerate Chengtong Group, and PLA Navy engineer Rear Admiral Ma 
Weiming, who received the PLA’s highest award last year.
An unfortunate incident on the last day of the plenary session was the
suicide of 54-year-old alternate CC member Ren Xuefeng, Deputy Party
Secretary of the centrally controlled Chongqing municipality, on October 31.
Rumours circulating in China claimed that he was being investigated and 
preferred to commit suicide by jumping from the Jingxi Hotel in Beijing
instead of serving jail time. Adding to these rumours was the fact that his 
remains were cremated at the Changping District Crematorium in Beijing
instead of Beijing’s Babaoshan Revolutionary Cemetery. Coincidentally,
the now disgraced former PBSC member Bo Xilai was also formerly Party
Secretary of Chongqing.
The 4th Plenum normally concerns itself with Party issues and, at times,
personnel appointments. This plenum followed past practice. The plenum 
communique was devoted mainly to the subject of the Party’s control as was 
the work report delivered at the plenum by CCP CC General Secretary Xi 
Jinping. According to the communique, the plenum approved the “Decisions 
on Some Major Issues Concerning Upholding and Improving the System 
of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Advancing the National 
Governance System and Modernization of Governance Capacity.”It discussed 
13 “outstanding strengths” of Chinese governance of which five were devoted 
entirely to maintaining the Party’s leadership and socialism. Pertinent 
among the others were: (i) “upholding equality of all ethnic groups, creating 
a strong sense of community for the Chinese nation, realizing a common
united struggle and common prosperity and development”; (ii) “selecting
officials based on integrity and ability and on the basis of merit to cultivate 
more talented individuals”; (iii) “keeping the armed forces under the Party’s 
command and ensuring that the people’s armed forces are completely loyal
to the Party and the people so as to safeguard China’s sovereignty, security 
– 128 – 
CCP CC’s 4th PLENUM COULD SUGGEST A DILUTION IN XI JINPING’S AUTHORITY 
and development interests”; (iv) “upholding the principle of ‘one country, 
two systems,’ maintaining lasting prosperity and stability in Hong Kong and
Macao, and promoting the peaceful reunification of the motherland”; and 
(v) “adhering to the unity of independence and self-reliance and opening
up to the rest of the world, actively participating in global governance, and 
continuing to contribute to the building of a community with a shared future 
for humanity”.
Emphasis on the need to ensure that the Party keeps the PLA under its 
command and that they “are completely loyal to the Party and the people”
suggests that the armed forces will continue to be subjected to strict ideological 
controls and education. Political reliability will remain the main criterion for 
promoting PLA officers.
The 18,441-character 4th Plenum Resolution issued on November 5 
evening clearly revealed that Hong Kong was discussed at some length at
the plenary session. The annual summer meeting of senior CCP leaders and 
veteran cadres at the seaside resort of Beidaihe had earlier this year also 
discussed the troubles in Hong Kong and, according to reports, unanimously
described it as a ‘colour revolution’. Special mention of this in the Plenum 
Resolution could suggest oblique criticism of Xi Jinping for the inaction in 
sorting out the Hong Kong issue. Soon after the 4th Plenum meeting, it 
was disclosed that Chinese President Xi Jinping had a one-on-one meeting 
with Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) Chief Executive 
Carrie Lam in Shanghai. China’s Minister of Public Security Zhao Kezhi,
who was recently added to the Party’s Central Leading Small Group on Hong
Kong, was also present. This was Xi Jinping’s first meeting with Carrie Lam 
since the trouble in Hong Kong began five months ago. Xinhua reported Xi 
Jinping as assuring her, “The central government has high trust in you and fully
affirms the work of you and the governance team of Hong Kong.” Carrie Lam was 
also scheduled to meet PBSC member Han Zheng, who is in charge of Hong
Kong affairs, on November 6 in Beijing.
Indications that Beijing will introduce tougher policies to govern Hong
Kong and Macau were evident in the 371-character paragraph in the 4th
Plenum Resolution dealing specially with the two Special Administrative 
Regions (SARs). This resolved to “improve the central system for appointing 
– 129 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
mechanisms of the Special Administrative Region Chief Executive and 
principal officials”, thus, signalling that Hong Kong will be brought more 
directly under Beijing’s control. Promising a more robust and immediate 
response in the future, it resolved to “establish a sound legal system and 
enforcement mechanisms in the Special Administrative Region to safeguard 
national security”, and “strengthen the law enforcement forces”. More 
importantly, the resolution asserted that Beijing will make “efforts to solve
deep-seated contradictions and problems that affect social stability and longterm development” in Hong Kong, “enhance the national consciousness and 
patriotism of the young people” and “resolutely prevent and curb the external 
force to interfere in Hong Kong and Macao affairs and divide, subversion,
infiltration, sabotage, ensure that Hong Kong and Macao have long-term
stability”. It is apparent that as the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
(HKSAR) is brought back to normalcy, Beijing will impose severe ideological 
and political education controls on its education system, its youth and civil 
servants. 
References in Xi Jinping’s speeches and documents issued by the CCP 
over the past many months to Deng Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin, Hu Jintao, etc 
have decreased. More recently, the document jointly issued by the Party
Central Committee and the People’s Republic of China (PRC) State Council 
on October 27, mentioned only “Xi Jinping Thought”as the “guiding principle” 
with no reference at all to Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin or 
Hu Jintao! The 4th Plenum communique, however, included two separate 
references asserting that “the Political Bureau of the Central Committee 
holds high the great banner of socialism with Chinese characteristics and 
adheres to Marxism-Leninism, Mao Zedong Thought, Deng Xiaoping
Theory, the important thinking of the ‘Three Represents’, and the scientific 
development concept. Guided by Xi Jinping’s new era of socialism with 
Chinese characteristics”. 
The just concluded 4th Plenum of the 19th CC of the CCP has endorsed 
the political education campaigns launched by Xi Jinping and his endeavour 
to enhance the Party’s authority and ensure it is present in virtually every
sphere of government and military activity. It has also not overtly weakened 
Xi Jinping’s position by inducting potential successors to the PBSC. However, 
– 130 – 
CCP CC’s 4th PLENUM COULD SUGGEST A DILUTION IN XI JINPING’S AUTHORITY 
its communique and the resolution issued subsequently do suggest that the 
troubles in Hong Kong were extensively discussed, with some criticism for 
the delay in acting to resolve them probably directed towards Xi Jinping and
possibly PBSC member Han Zheng. The reference in the communique to
“Marxism-Leninism, Mao Zedong Thought, Deng Xiaoping Theory”, etc 
appear to reinforce this. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
November 6, 2019.) 
– 131 – 
 
19. Chinese President Xi Jinping Faces Difficult 
Times Ahead 
There are clear indications that popular dissatisfaction and discontent with
Chinese President Xi Jinping inside China continue to simmer just below
the surface. The economic slowdown, unemployment and rising cost of living
have contributed to the discontent. In fact, accentuated by the US-China trade
war, the economic slowdown has begun to impact other areas including the
strategic geoeconomic Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) which has seen a drop in
investments, and possibly China’s defence build-up, with discussions underway 
in China’s military establishment as to whether, for example, the rapid pace
of ship-building should be slowed down. The negative sentiments could get
sharpened as huge numbers of people travel to their hometowns and villages to
meet relatives during the annual Chinese New Year holidays in end January.The
situation in Hong Kong too shows no signs of abating. Chinese President Xi
Jinping is likely to face troubled times ahead in the upcoming Year of the Rat.
Aware of the spreading negative sentiment inside China, Xi Jinping, who 
has concentrated unprecedented power and continues to build his personality 
cult, is strengthening the country’s public security apparatus and reinforcing 
surveillance with Artificial Intelligence (AI). He is, additionally, imposing 
increasingly restrictive ideological controls combined with strict political 
‘guidance’. ‘Patriotic education’ and ideology have become the dominant 
themes over the past few months, with citizens constantly exhorted to live 
by the “Twelve Socialist Core Values”. Party cadres are assembled across the 
country for regular training and study sessions under the slogan: “Never forget 
the original ideal and ambition, keep in mind the mission”. This heightened 
Party supervision includes academia. From October 2019, ‘student spies’ have 
been mobilised to monitor and report on ‘radical’ political views, including of 
their teachers. They reinforce the Party and Public Security Personnel (PSP) 
deployed in schools and university campuses since 2018. 
CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING FACES DIFFICULT TIMES AHEAD 
Several professors and schoolteachers have been dismissed or disciplined
for voicing opinions not in conformity with the Party line. Liang Xin, a 
teacher at a top secondary school in eastern China was last year demoted to 
school janitor following a report by a student. In April 2019, the Mathematics 
teacher at the Beijing University of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Xu 
Chuanqing, was penalised after her students accused her on social media of 
comparing them unfavourably to hard-working Japanese students and two 
months later in June, a teacher at a Beijing secondary school was dismissed
for discussing the Tiananmen Square crackdown. More recently, in December,
Professor Zhao Siyuan, Deputy Dean of the Arts School at Communication 
University of Zhejiang, was given a “severe warning” for “using inappropriate 
terms” while addressing new students. Chu Zhaohui, a senior researcher at 
China’s National Institute of Education, told the South China Morning Post 
(October 20), “The number of students reporting their teachers has increased 
recently but official statistics are not available. … in some cases, high school
and university students have been asked by relevant [government] departments 
to report inappropriate classroom comment.”
Guo Shengkun, former Minister of Public Security who as head of the
Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) Political and Legal Affairs Commission 
now oversees the country’s entire security apparatus, recently ratcheted up
the security environment. The troubles in Hong Kong would have been a 
contributory factor. In an article in the People’s Daily on November 28, 2019, 
he called for the firm defence of “national political security,” described as “the 
lifeline of the Party’s and the nation’s security, and an unshakable bottom 
line.” Guo Shengkun vowed “resolutely and severely to prevent and crack 
down on” the infiltration of hostile forces and said that construction of the 
“people’s defense line for national security” should be strengthened.The whole 
country and the entire population should enhance their awareness of the sense 
of national security and enhance the nation’s ability to prevent, and defend 
against, national security risks. He said that everyone ought to be “on high
vigilance, take resolute precautions, and severely punish” infiltration by hostile 
forces and their destructive and subversive activities to promote secession, thus,
“building a solid copper and iron wall for national security.” Guo Shengkun
advocated concerted efforts to advance national security work and walk the 
– 133 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
“path of national security with Chinese characteristics.” Regarding issues 
causing potential social unrest, Guo Shengkun demanded that “small matters 
stay in the village, big issues go no further than the township, and conflicts are 
not passed on to higher level authorities.”
Notwithstanding the growing restrictions and personal risk, 
resentment has occasionally spilt over into the public domain. China has
always been sensitive to criticism by its leading academics. On October
31, 2019, Tsinghua University Professor Lao Dongyan (ࣣь⠅) emulated
another reputed academic and, risking certain punishment, posted a sharply
worded approximately 2,900-character article on her public Wechat
account, expressing her worries about facial recognition technology.
Professor Lao Dongyan was, incidentally, one of nearly 300 faculty and
students at Tsinghua who signed a letter in support of Tsinghua Professor
Xu Zhangrun, suspended in July 2019 for warning against the return
to totalitarianism and for criticism of the Communist Party. Arguing
against the use of facial recognition in the Beijing Subway, Professor Lao
Dongyan wrote: “I can only say: forgive me, but I cannot accept this type of
kindness…We must know that in our society, any personal data, as long as
it is controlled by enterprises or other institutions, is also controlled by the
government. Because this huge organization is run by specific people, this
is equivalent to saying that all personal data, including highly recognizable 
biometric data, are controlled by a few people in that group…The people
who control our data are obviously not God. They have their own selfish
desires and weak points. Therefore, it is unknown how they will use our
personal data and how they will manipulate our lives. Not to mention, such
data may be leaked or hacked due to improper storage, leading to harmful
results that may be exploited by criminals.” Stating that she also objected
to forcing people to undergo face recognition inspections in airports and
hotels, she asked whether in a few years genes or fingerprint recognition
would be implemented. She recommended that the National People’s 
Congress (NPC) Standing Committee conduct a basic legitimacy review
of the Beijing Metro ’s use of face recognition for classified security checks;
at the same time, it should consider initiating corresponding legislative
procedures for the arbitrary use of faces. 
– 134 – 
 
CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING FACES DIFFICULT TIMES AHEAD 
In an unrelated but similar case of academia objecting to Party regulations,
students at the prestigious Fudan University in Shanghai were outraged after 
“freedom of thought” was removed as a core value from its charter. Instead,
references strengthening the CCP’s leadership were added to the charters 
of Fudan and two other universities. On December 18, students of Fudan 
University gathered at the Danyuan cafeteria in Guanghua Building at
Fudan University to sing the school’s anthem, which specifically mentions 
“independent thinking.” By December 18 afternoon, a hashtag discussing the
Fudan University’s charter changes had been viewed more than 1.7 million 
times on Weibo, before being censored later that evening. Lu Xiaoping, Vice 
President of the Literature School at Nanjing University, whose charter was 
also rewritten, posted a comment on Weibo on December 18—which was 
later deleted—saying, “If we do not speak out today about such a blatant
challenge to the bottom line of education and academic ethics, I am afraid we
will never have the chance!” In addition to Fudan and Nanjing, the Shaanxi 
Normal University, in northwestern China was the third university to have its 
charter altered. 
A BBC Chinese report (December 6, 2019) reflected the popular
dissatisfaction with state surveillance. Stating that the Chinese people now 
had to undergo facial scanning while registering their new mobile phone
numbers, it reported the findings of a recent Chinese survey. It disclosed that 
a research centre affiliated with the Guangzhou-based Southern Metropolis 
Daily had conducted a survey on facial recognition during October and
November 2019. It said that among the respondents to the centre’s online 
questionnaire, 57 per cent were worried that their personal whereabouts were
recorded, while nearly 50 per cent were worried that criminals may use fake
information to perpetrate fraud or theft. Nearly 84 per cent of the respondents
wanted operators of the facial recognition system to provide them with a 
channel to view or delete facial data; 74 per cent of respondents wanted to
choose whether to use facial recognition or traditional methods. The survey,
however, also showed that about 60 to 70 per cent of respondents believed 
that facial recognition made public places safer. According to the Chinese
media, the Metro system in Zhengzhou city of Henan province started “riding
with face” (using facial recognition in the Metro system) in early December. 
– 135 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
The China Daily reported that riders can use facial recognition to authorise 
payment automatically instead of scanning the QR code on their mobile
phones. Currently, passengers can voluntarily choose whether to use facial 
recognition or not.
Other indicators of internal discontent are the ‘leaks’ to the foreign press 
about the wealth allegedly illegally accumulated by the Chinese leaders, and 
to the New York Times of more than 400 pages of ‘internal’ Chinese documents 
relating to the detention of the Uyghur minority in heavily guarded camps in
the Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous Region.
While there are presently no signs of any threat to Chinese President Xi 
Jinping’s authority or position, these challenges to the authority of the state
have the potential to escalate or be exploited by Xi Jinping’s opponents. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
January 1, 2020.) 
– 136 – 
 
20. Popular Protests Undermine Chinese
 
President Xi Jinping’s Credibility
 
Popular discontent and dissatisfaction with Chinese President Xi Jinping and 
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) simmering since March 2018, erupted 
into overt public criticism from the end of January 2020, prompted by news of 
the Wuhan virus epidemic becoming public.There is presently little indication 
of it abating till at least the epidemic begins to peter out. By then, it would 
have palpably dented, if not damaged, the credibility and image of Chinese 
President Xi Jinping and the CCP.
The immediate provocation for this outburst has been the mishandling
of the ‘Wuhan virus’, or ‘2019-COVID’, by the Chinese authorities. China’s 
social media has been awash with angry posts criticising the excessive secrecy of
the system and the tardy response of the authorities, the reluctance to admit to
the epidemic and its spread, and the absence of transparency. Interesting was a
report in the authoritative, official news agency Xinhua on February 10, which
revealed that Beijing’s Ditan Hospital was treating coronavirus patients as
early as January 12, more than 10 days before the city’s first cases were publicly
announced at another hospital in the Daxing district, and Chinese epidemiologist
Zhong Nanshan confirmed that the disease was being transmitted from personto-person! Video clips being posted on China’s social media showed that 
preparations to tackle the epidemic were inadequate, with overcrowded hospitals
and medical personnel pleading for medicines and medical supplies. The death
of the 34-year-old doctor and ‘whistle-blower’ on February 7, gave a fillip to the 
criticism and sharp condemnation. Xi Jinping’s disappearance from the official 
media and public functions from January 29 till February 10 were commented
upon.The spate of public criticism has questioned the system of governance, the
CCP’s legitimacy and undermined Xi Jinping’s credibility.
Criticism has been unusually blunt. People posted criticisms on their 
personal accounts despite the certain personal risk. Critics include at least two 
prominent Chinese intellectuals and academics and a judge of the Supreme 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
People’s Procuratorate. A prominent Chinese civil rights activist and former
Lecturer at the Beijing University of Post and Telecommunications, 46-yearold Xu Zhiyong, posted an article on social media on February 3, urging Xi
Jinping to step down for his “inability to handle major crises”. He cited several 
examples, including the China-US trade war, the anti-government protests 
in Hong Kong and the coronavirus outbreak. He called Xi Jinping’s political 
ideology “confusing”, his governance model “outdated” and said he had ruined 
China with “exhaustive social stability maintenance measures”. Xu Zhiyong
said,“Seven years ago, I appealed to you to lead China to become a nation that 
respects democracy and the Constitution, but in return, I was thrown into jail
for four years. And now, your men are still looking for me trying to throw me 
back in jail again. I don’t think you are a villain, just someone who is not very
smart. For the public’s sake, I’m asking you again: Step down, Mr Xi Jinping.”
Reputed Tsinghua University Professor Xu Zhangrun,on February 5,posted
a scathing 6,246- character criticism of Xi Jinping and the Chinese authorities
captioned “Angry People No Longer Fear”, which went viral on China’s social 
media. The article accused the authorities in Zhongnanhai and specifically Xi
Jinping of being out of touch with the people’s needs and perpetuating an elite
with so-called ‘Red Genes’. It accused Xi Jinping and a “small circle of leaders”of
creating a “state within a state and engaging in “big data terrorism”. He charged,
“The political system has collapsed under the tyranny, and a governance system 
[made up] of bureaucrats, which has taken [the Party] more than 30 years to
build, has floundered”. He accused the authorities of spending the “taxpayers’
hard-earned money for feeding the massive internet police to monitor every
word and deed of nationals”. Xu Zhangrun said they have not only “stifled
public discussion of all ideas of life, but also stifled social communication and
early warning mechanisms that existed originally” and blamed this for the
failure of the authorities in Hubei to take precautions to control the epidemic.
The article, which called Xi Jinping a “political tyrant”, declared “the people no
longer fear” and “the Sun will eventually come to this land of freedom!” Another
major 10,000-character article published by Xu Zhangrun on July 24, 2018, had
ricocheted across China, creating a stir among Chinese academics and students.
He was suspended from his post, banned from leaving China and not allowed
to publish his writings freely in China. 
– 138 – 
 
POPULAR PROTESTS UNDERMINE CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING’S CREDIBILITY 
Pertinent is that though both Xu Zhiyong and Xu Zhangrun have been 
penalised and prohibited from writing, they have been able to post their 
articles on China’s social media. 
Unprecedented is the lengthy article posted on February 13 on the
public social media account of Duan Zhanjiang, a judge of China’s Supreme 
People’s Procuratorate. The article on the account criticised the shortcomings
in governance, not allowing civil society to have a larger role, suppression of 
free speech, etc and predicted a far, serious fallout for the Chinese economy. It 
referred also to Tsinghua University Professor Xu Zhangrun’s recent lengthy 
article. The article is a clear indictment of Chinese President Xi Jinping. The 
article did, though, end with the curious disclaimer that these are not the 
personal views of the judge.
Surprising was the instigation via a Twitter account calling on the people
of Wuhan to protest aganist “the Communist government’s suppression of 
freedom of speech and its hiding of information”. It urged the people to 
protest from their homes from 8 pm to 8:30 pm on February 14, 2020 by
turning off the lights for one minute at 8 pm; simultaneously knocking on
pans and shouting “Protest”; the slogans “Cheers, Wuhan People!”; “Wuhan 
People, Save Ourselves!”; “Release Chen Qiushi!” and “Release Fang Bin!”
(both arrested for revealing the truth about the epidemic situation in Wuhan);
singing China’s national anthem; throwing flyers and other pieces of paper 
from their homes; and doing a live broadcast or recording short videos to 
disseminate on the internet. 
Dissatisfaction with Xi Jinping and the regime has been simmering since
at least 2018. The economic slowdown, unemployment, rising cost of living and
consumer inflation at a near six-year high have all contributed to the discontent.
Accentuated by the US-China trade war, the economic slowdown resulted in
the closure of factories and restaurants, and lay-offs of millions of workers. The
relentless campaign against corruption, which has felled hundreds of senior
Party, military and government cadres along with millions of Party members,
added to the pools of popular discontent. The negative sentiments would have
got accentuated as people met relatives in their hometowns and villages during
the annual Chinese New Year holidays in end January.The onset of the epidemic
and quarantine regulations would have compelled many to extend their stay. 
– 139 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Clear indications of discontent were the sharp reactions to the proposal
mooted at the National People’s Congress (NPC) in March 2018 to abolish 
term limits on the posts of China’s President and Vice President. Senior 
prominent academics, students and others reacted negatively to the proposal 
saying they did not want a return to Mao’s ‘one-man rule’ and asked Deputies
to the National People’s Congress (NPC) to reject it. Many Party members,
including in the CCP Central Committee, still retain unpleasant memories of 
the Cultural Revolution. Popular resentment has mounted since then.
Popular discontent was further heightened by the imposition of controls 
and Party ideology on academia. Party cadres have been posted in classrooms 
since 2018 to monitor the content of lectures, libraries have been inspected
and books deemed to contain ‘liberal’ Western thought have been weeded 
out. ‘Student spies’ have been recruited to monitor the utterances of university
Professors within and outside the classrooms. The effort to strengthen the
Communist Party’s leadership in universities included, for example, the 
removal of “freedom of thought” as a core value from the charter of the 
prestigious Fudan University in Shanghai and its replacement by references 
strengthening the Communist Party’s leadership. Students at Fudan protested 
with sit-ins and demonstrations on December 18, 2019, and sang Fudan 
University’s anthem, which specifically mentions “independent thinking.” Lu
Xiaoping, Vice President of the literature school at Nanjing University, whose 
charter was similarly rewritten, posted a comment on Weibo on December 
18—which was later deleted—saying, “If we do not speak out today about
such a blatant challenge to the bottom line of education and academic ethics,
I am afraid we will never have the chance!” 
The increasingly intrusive and strict security and ‘social stability’ measures 
being enforced over the past few years have upset the people. Numerous reports
in the official Chinese media refer to implementation of the ‘social credit 
management’programme in a growing number of cities across China.Often they
indirectly point to the inconvenience caused. This was brought out by Tsinghua
University Professor Lao Dongyan on October 31, 2019, who expressed her
worries about facial recognition technology. In a 2,900-word post on her
public Wechat account, she wrote: “I cannot accept this type of kindness…We
must know that in our society, any personal data, as long as it is controlled by 
– 140 – 
POPULAR PROTESTS UNDERMINE CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING’S CREDIBILITY 
enterprises or other institutions, is also controlled by the government. Because
this huge organization is run by specific people, this is equivalent to saying that
all personal data, including highly recognizable biometric data, are controlled
by a few people in that group…The people who control our data are obviously
not God. They have their own selfish desires and weak points. Therefore, it is
unknown how they will use our personal data and how they will manipulate our
lives.Not to mention,such data may be leaked or hacked due to improper storage,
leading to harmful results that may be exploited by criminals.” Interestingly,
Professor Lao Dongyan was one of nearly 300 faculty and students at Tsinghua
who signed a letter in support of Tsinghua Professor Xu Zhangrun, suspended
for criticism of the Communist Party.
A BBC report (in Chinese) on December 6, 2019, reflected the public
sentiment about the usage of security controls and facial recognition software.
Commenting on a new Chinese government initiative requiring Chinese
people to undergo facial scanning while registering their new mobile 
phone numbers, it referred to an online survey on facial recognition done
by a research centre affiliated with the Guangzhou-based official Southern 
Metropolis Daily. Among the respondents, 57 per cent were worried that their 
personal whereabouts were recorded while nearly 50 per cent were worried 
that criminals may use fake information to perpetrate fraud or theft. Nearly 84 
per cent of the respondents wanted operators of the facial recognition system 
to provide them with a channel to view or delete facial data; 74 per cent of 
respondents wanted to choose whether to use facial recognition or traditional
methods. However, the survey also showed that about 60 to 70 per cent of 
respondents believe that facial recognition makes public places safer.
In addition to the poor economy and imposition of security and ideological 
controls, Chinese President Xi Jinping is viewed as responsible for the setbacks in China’s foreign policy, namely the US-China trade war, the situation 
in Hong Kong and the recent victory of the pro-independence Democratic
Progressive Party (DPP) in Taiwan. Some Chinese strategists and academics 
have said that the China-US relationship was mishandled due to arrogance
and over-confidence. According to them, China is not powerful enough to
challenge the US and Xi Jinping’s declaration at the 19th Party Congress in 
October 2017 of the ‘China Dream’-2021, ‘Made in China-2025’ and China 
– 141 – 
 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
reaching the level of the world’s advanced global powers by 2049, challenged
US primacy. They assess that the US-China trade war has placed China in a
difficult situation, is isolating it, and could delay realisation of its ambitions.
Chinese academics have suggested that Beijing revert to its earlier policy of
‘biding one’s time’. 
The situation in Hong Kong is directly linked to Xi Jinping’s ‘China 
Dream’, which includes reunification of China. By not acting swiftly, Xi Jinping
has allowed the situation in Hong Kong—which reverted to China’s rule 23 
years ago—to slip into the control of the protestors for almost 10 months and
provide an example to others, like Taiwan, of a successful challenge to Beijing’s 
rule. While Chinese analysts say that Xi Jinping did not want a repeat of the
Tiananmen ‘event’ or to shed Chinese blood, the indecision points also to
differences within the Politburo that possibly hamper a consensus. The inaction
despite concerns about a ‘colour revolution’, being voiced by Xi Jinping at a
Politburo Standing Committee meeting and other Directors of the Provincial
Public Security Bureaus, is inexplicable. It was only on January 4, that Xi Jinping
took steps to apparently demonstrate he was in charge and replaced the head
of the Liaison Office in Hong Kong with 65-year-old former Shanxi Province
Party Secretary Luo Huining. But till the Hong Kong issue is resolved, the
matter of Taiwan’s reunification with Mainland China will stay in limbo and Xi
Jinping’s ‘China Dream’ will not be achieved. 
A lot is at stake for Xi Jinping and the CCP. Unless the economy picks 
up, unemployment is checked and gains made in foreign policy and the ‘China 
Dream’, the CCP and Xi Jinping risk their legitimacy being seriously dented.
In the event of there being no substantive visible improvement, Chinese 
President Xi Jinping, who has consistently pushed ideology and nationalism
since coming to office in 2012, might be coerced by the Party and its veterans 
to share power in the run-up to the upcoming 20th Party Congress and not 
continue thereafter. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
February 17, 2020.) 
– 142 – 
21. The COVID-19 Epidemic and China’s Economy
 
The coronavirus epidemic struck China when it was in the midst of serious 
economic problems and high unemployment, and Chinese economists were
already candidly warning of a one per cent drop in growth this year. The 
attempted cover-up by Chinese authorities of the coronavirus epidemic for 
nearly two months—unimaginable in democracies—exacerbated economic 
losses and disruption in addition to causing the loss of numerous lives and 
delaying an international medical response to the virus. Reports say at least 
two international pharmaceutical companies are to start human trials of 
vaccines against the coronavirus by next month and could have the vaccines 
ready by early next year. Chinese economists had warned in January that if the 
epidemic was not contained by mid-February, China’s growth rate could drop 
by two per cent. The absence of transparency in efforts to, initially, inform the 
people and, later, combat the coronavirus, led subsequently to the imposition 
of unavoidable drastic measures and sharply accentuated the already high level 
of distrust between the people and China’s Communist regime.
The US-based Rhodium Group assessed (March 11) that while the pace 
of new COVID-19 transmissions is coming down in China, the “pathway 
to economic recovery remains deeply uncertain”. It asserted that China has 
endured a severe economic downturn in the first quarter of 2020. The report 
pointed to the transportation sector which registered 82 per cent fewer 
trips in the 25 days following the Lunar New Year in 2020 relative to 2019,
signalling that workers were not returning from the countryside. It recorded 
that coal consumption by China’s six largest power plants fell over 40 per cent;
property sales in major cities were near-zero in February; manufacturing and 
services recorded major contractions; and the shutdown of China’s economy 
is even visible from space, with satellite readings showing almost non-existent 
nitrogen oxide and dioxide emissions from swaths of the industrial heartland.
Despite the economic losses and disruption caused by the coronavirus 
epidemic, Chinese President Xi Jinping sought to keep the focus on China’s 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
economic targets and the ‘Two Centenary’ goals. In a teleconference directly
with over 170,000 officials across the country on February 23 on “Coordinating
and Promoting New Crown Pneumonia Epidemic Prevention and Control 
and Economic and Social Development Work”, Chinese President Xi Jinping
focussed on reviving the economy. He said that over 46 per cent of China’s 
counties and districts are classified as ‘low risk’ and should be getting back 
to normal soon. Those facing ‘moderate risk’ need to be more cautious— 
resuming work only gradually. Xi Jinping also assured that top leaders are 
ready to employ fiscal and monetary policies if needed and “macro policies…
should prevent the economy from slipping out of a reasonable range.” He 
urged local governments to address supply chain congestion in and between 
provinces. Xi Jinping expressed concern about China’s role in global trade 
saying: “[We] need to secure the smooth operation of foreign trade supply
chains and stabilize [China’s] share in the international market.”
At the Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) meeting on March 4 
to “study the current epidemic prevention and control work and economic 
and social stability”, Xi Jinping claimed there was overall improvement in 
the epidemic situation across China and resumption of economic activities 
had accelerated. He had earlier issued instructions to speed up resumption
of work in factories, etc. He reminded PBSC members of the “complexity”
of the current epidemic prevention and control and the economic and social 
developments. He urged deepening international cooperation and giving full
play to China’s role as a “responsible great power.” The meeting specifically
stated that prevention and control efforts must persist in Wuhan, Hubei, and 
the Beijing region and emphasised the importance of enhancing scientific
efforts to develop treatments and vaccines. It stressed the imperative to 
minimise economic losses and also that China must assist companies, stabilise 
employment, and facilitate the hiring of key groups such as college graduates
and migrant workers. The adoption of various “point-to-point” transportation 
methods should continue to allow employees to return to work as soon 
as possible. Additionally, China will push for the construction of major 
projects including 5G and increase investments in public health services and 
production of emergency supplies. The meeting urged for stabilising foreign
trade and investment and facilitating foreign-invested companies in China to 
– 144 – 
THE COVID-19 EPIDEMIC AND CHINA’S ECONOMY 
resume work. In conclusion, the meeting emphasised the importance of the 
spring agricultural production, stabilising prices of agricultural products, and 
increasing poverty alleviation efforts.
In step with Chinese President Xi Jinping’s exhortation and despite the 
severe disruption caused by the COVID-19 epidemic, China has continued 
trying to further the objectives of the ‘China Dream’. The Economics and 
Technology Research Institute (CNPC-ETRI) of the state-owned China
National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), for instance, disclosed that it 
was exploring the possibility of a Beijing-led global health organisation that 
would rival the World Health Organisation (WHO). Carice Witte, founder 
and Executive Director of the Israeli company SIGNAL, confirmed the idea 
and described it as “very interesting in the context of China’s aim to reshape
global governance, including setting up parallel institutions.” Chinese Foreign
Minister Wang Yi, while highlighting (March 2) the Chinese government’s 
strengths in combatting the coronavirus epidemic, referred to China’s 
‘Two Centenary Goals’ and vision of building “a community with a shared 
future for mankind”! On March 8, the Chinese government announced its 
decision to donate US$ 20 million to the WHO to support it in carrying out
international cooperation in fighting the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19).
The impact of the coronavirus epidemic on China has been severe. 
With over 80,000 persons infected by the coronavirus; millions of persons
under quarantine; schools, colleges, restaurants and public places closed 
resulting in laying-off millions of workers to join the millions of those already
unemployed; stringent transport restrictions imposed throughout China;
and 18 cities placed under strict isolation, the economic losses are enormous.
Additionally, the Chinese government’s delayed response to the epidemic and
lack of transparency further raised the existing serious trust deficit between the 
authorities and the public of which there were frequent public demonstrations.
A number of China’s factories, Research and Development (R&D) 
centres and companies, many headquartered in Wuhan, were shut down,
with efforts to reopen them beginning in late February with patchy results.
Navy shipyards, aircraft factories and weapons production plants were closed.
Regulations were issued to restrict the activities and training of China’s 
– 145 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA). Recruitment to the PLA, which had been 
planned in two phases, was postponed. China’s major internet companies,
including Tencent, ByteDance, Baidu and Didi, deferred the date for their 
employees to return to offices.
After January though, the government made huge efforts, including 
severe isolation measures for entire cities and populations. It constructed 
three hospitals within weeks, using China’s Air Force to transport medical 
equipment, supplies and personnel, and deploy military doctors and medical 
staff to Wuhan. 
Restaurants, food stalls, etc closed due to the coronavirus epidemic,
rendering millions of workers unemployed. A China Cuisine Association 
survey reported that around 95 per cent of caterers experienced major losses 
over the Lunar New Year. The report said the impact of the coronavirus 
outbreak on China’s restaurants,fast-food joints and snack stands will be several 
times greater than that caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
(SARS) outbreak of 2003. Besides losses over the holiday, businesses are 
likely to face serious cash flow issues and difficulty obtaining financing in the
coming months. More than 300 Chinese companies including smartphonemaker Xiaomi and China’s ride-hailing giant Didi Chuxing are seeking bank
loans totalling at least US$ 8.2 billion to ease the impact of the coronavirus 
epidemic. China has decided to provide medium-term funding to banks and 
cut the interest rate it charges as officials seek to cushion the economy from 
the epidemic.
The well-known Chinese news site Sina reported on January 27, that 
China’s Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security issued new 
regulations to relax certain labour laws for the period when the nation is 
combating the coronavirus. The new regulations prohibit laying off workers 
or stopping their pay if the workers are not able to work due to government 
bans. Companies have been instructed to provide a minimum living payment 
to those not able to work. For those involved in the rescue activities of the 
epidemic who temporarily lose their income and are not able to pay off credit 
card debts or a mortgage, this will not be recognised as a breach of contract.
Delayed payments should be allowed. The State Grid for electricity also
announced that customers would be allowed to continue to use electricity even 
– 146 – 
THE COVID-19 EPIDEMIC AND CHINA’S ECONOMY 
if their date for payment of dues is past. The State Grid will also arrange for
customers to do business remotely online without visiting local offices.
Soon after the coronavirus struck and its magnitude was gauged, Chinese 
economists said in early January that China’s services sector alone was suffering
a loss of US$ 144 billion a week! Some of China’s major internet companies,
including Tencent, ByteDance, Baidu and Didi, deferred the date for their 
employees to return to offices. Apple iPhone maker Foxconn, which employs
more than 400,000 on the Chinese Mainland, delayed complete reopening
until March. A broad survey of American companies in China released on 
February 18, showed that more than three quarters had insufficient staff to run 
a full production line. Data released by the Chinese software company Gaode
on March 10, showed that while Wuhan’s work resumption rate stood at just
12.54 per cent, most companies planned to ramp up work to 80 per cent by
end March. Meanwhile, to encourage companies to resume work amid the 
coronavirus outbreak, China’s Ministry of Transport said (February 15) that
China’s roads will be toll-free starting February 17. The policy would be in 
force until the epidemic is deemed to be over.
China’s official The Paper observed (March 5) that while businesses are 
reopening, the “economy remains severely depressed”. It cited Baidu’s Big
Data as showing that over 50 per cent of offline [businesses] had resumed 
work nationally. It said, “The percentage of offline [businesses] that have 
resumed work exceeds 63 per cent in Xining, Dalian, and Changchun, which 
lead the country in this respect.” Separately Xinhua reported that less than 
half of small and medium enterprises were back at work: “Around 45 per cent
of China’s Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) had resumed work” by
March 2, up from 32.8 per cent as of February 26, according to the Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology (MIIT). MySteel, a magazine reporting
on the coal industry, said, “The capacity utilization rate as of March 3 [of coal
mines was] 83.4 per cent, according to official data from China’s National 
Energy Administration.” In a rare and major step, China National Offshore 
Oil Corp., China’s biggest Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) buyer, invoked force 
majeure and told some suppliers it would not take delivery of cargo because of 
constraints caused by the coronavirus. French oil and gas giant Total SA have 
rejected the declaration. Soon thereafter, the Chinese copper smelter Guangxi 
– 147 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Nanguo also declared it would refuse to take delivery of raw materials. China’s 
biggest oil refiner, Sinopec Group, is similarly likely to ask Saudi Arabia to 
reduce crude supplies next month.
Xinhua reported on February 13 that according to data for January released 
by the China Association of Automobile Manufacturers (CAAM), Chinese 
national automobile manufacturing volume declined 33.5 per cent, monthover-month, and 24.6 per cent, year-over-year. The sales volume declined 27 
per cent, month-over-month and 18 per cent, year-over-year. Passenger car 
sales declined 27.1 per cent month-over month and 20.2 per cent, year-overyear. New energy source automobile sales declined 54.4 per cent year-overyear. According to CAAM officials, the coronavirus impact started later in 
January so February numbers are expected to be much worse, as they will 
start to show the impact on market activities, manufacturing capacity, export 
limitations, financial bottlenecks and tougher government regulations. They
anticipate that the Chinese automobile market may slump further.
The coronavirus epidemic also has hidden costs. For example the Deputy
Governor of the People’s Bank of China (PBoC), Fan Yifei disclosed 
(February 15) that the bank was ‘sanitising’ bank notes as well as blocking
their movement between cities in regions most affected by the outbreak to 
limit transmission of the virus. Other banks could be expected to do the same.
There was indication too of capital flight. China’s central bank in February 
announced increased punishment for financial institutions that failed to
adequately guard against money laundering and imposed fines of more than 
Yuan 10 million (US$ 1.4 million) for the first time. The China Minsheng
Banking Corp. was fined Yuan 23.7 million and China Everbright Bank Co.
Ltd. Yuan 18.2 million. They were penalised for failing to properly perform 
the required customer identification checks, failing to keep customer data and
transaction records and failing to report large or suspicious transactions. The 
PBoC fined the brokerage Huatai Securities Co. Ltd. Yuan 10.1 million for 
similar violations. 
The severe blow to the Chinese economy caused by the coronavirus,
however, has come atop an already deteriorating economy. Singapore’s primary
Chinese-language newspaper Lianhe Zaobao reported (December 31) that
China saw its lowest level of overseas acquisitions in 2019, with a total value 
– 148 – 
THE COVID-19 EPIDEMIC AND CHINA’S ECONOMY 
of US$ 41 billion, or half the 2018 volume. Acquisitions in the US declined 
by 80 per cent in 2019. Analysts in the global banking industry believe that 
the sharp decline in overseas acquisition is directly attributable to the USChina trade war and significantly tightened government regulatory measures 
imposed in many countries against Chinese buyers. It observed that with 
the economic slowdown in China, the Chinese government began strictly 
controlling the volume of capital flowing out of China, making it especially
difficult for Chinese investors to pay back the debts acquired overseas. It is 
expected that more domestic investments will be seen in China than overseas.
Reuters reported ( January 22) that about two-thirds of China’s provinces,
regions and municipalities had cut their 2020 growth targets from last year,
despite easing trade tensions with the US. It added: “Of China’s provinciallevel regions, 22, including Beijing, Guangdong, Zhejiang, Henan, Hainan,
and Fujian, set lower growth targets this year compared to last year. Beijing,
Shanghai, and the southern export hub of Guangdong all dropped their
targets from 6-6.5 per cent growth to ‘around 6 per cent’ in 2020, in line 
with the expected change to the national target ... At least 11 provincial-level 
regions missed their 2019 GDP targets, according to preliminary statistics 
released by local governments.Targets for 2020 ranged from around 5 per cent 
growth—for the north-eastern province of Heilongjiang and the northern city
of Tianjin—to around 9 per cent growth for the Tibet Autonomous Region.” 
There have been other earlier warnings of the downturn in China’s 
economy. In mid-December 2018, Renmin University Prof. Xiang Songzuo
highlighted serious doubts about the economy at a public function, which 
was promptly censored on the Chinese internet. He questioned China’s real 
rate of growth—declaring that a “research group of an important institution”
had released an internal report stating China’s GDP growth this year was 
about 1.67 per cent—the poor state of private businesses in China, and a lack
of confidence. Within days, 59-year old Chen Hongtian, Chairman of the 
Cheung Kei Group and member of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative 
Conference (CPPCC), warned nearly 150 tycoons based mainly in Shenzhen 
and Hong Kong, that China’s private business entrepreneurs should prepare 
for a “winter colder and longer than expected”. The group included Tencent 
Chairman Pony Ma, the Chairman of car-maker BYD, Wang Chuanfu, 
– 149 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and the Chairman of courier service SF Express, Wang Wei. Meanwhile,
State owned Enterprises (SoEs) expanded to enter virtually every sector of
economic activity.
More recently on November 27, Gao Shanwen, a well-known economist 
in China, in a speech at an internal annual strategy meeting predicted that 
China’s economic slowdown would last several years and that the average
annual economic growth between 2020 and 2030 will stay below 5 per cent.
Gao Shanwen was even concerned about whether GDP would grow above 4 
per cent. He identified two contributing factors: first, the impact of the trade 
war; and second, the stagnation of China’s economic reform as seen in the 
“advancement of the state enterprises and the retreat of the private sector.”
Gao Shanwen said that the government has used strong counter-cyclical 
measures to prevent the economic downturn, but these have barely supported 
the growth rate at about 6 per cent. The stimulus policies are less and less 
effective and, with a weak domestic market, the economy of 2020 doesn’t look 
good. Gao Shanwen’s speech was widely circulated on the internet, but deleted 
within a day.
On December 8, Sina.com published economic data posted on the
internet by an unnamed author which explained that China’s economy is
at its most difficult time. It was widely disseminated across the internet in 
China. Its main points are: (i) the number of people using Baidu to search 
for jobs in 2019 jumped to 28.54 million from the under 7.5 million people
job seekers in 2018; (ii) all four Chinese companies ranked in the top ten
companies with the highest profits in the world are banks, suggesting that
China’s banking sector is squeezing profits out of other industries. China’s 
banking sector claims 40 per cent net income return; (iii) China’s SoEs are 
growing and the private companies and foreign companies are shrinking; (iv)
people are short of money. The fund industry (both mutual funds and hedge
funds) raised Yuan 500 billion (US $72 billion) in the third quarter of 2017 
alone. However, for the whole year of 2019, it only raised Yuan 180 billion;
(v) 1,884 movie or TV related companies closed in 2019; (vi) new car sales 
dropped 2.76 per cent in 2018 compared to 2017. From January to October
2019, the number of new cars manufactured and sold dropped 10.4 per cent
and 9.7 per cent respectively, compared to a year ago; (vii) China is departing 
– 150 – 
THE COVID-19 EPIDEMIC AND CHINA’S ECONOMY 
from real (manufacturing) businesses. Among the total assets of companies in
China, the financial and real estate industries claim 47.9 per cent of the assets,
whereas the manufacturing sector accounts for only 11.7 per cent; (viii) in the
first six months of 2019, all provinces in China, except Shanghai, ran into a 
fiscal deficit. 
The coronavirus had an important political impact too. The attempts by
the government to cover up news of the epidemic, the delayed response and the
lack of transparency in the initial weeks generated an angry public reaction. It 
provoked seldom seen public criticism of Chinese President Xi Jinping and the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Xi Jinping’s till now unexplained absence
between January 29 and February 10 from public view and the official media 
and state-owned national TV at a time when China was facing a national
medical crisis, drew added critical comment. Reputed Chinese intellectuals
and scholars at certain personal risk posted criticism of Xi Jinping and the
CCP on their public social media accounts. Well known Chinese Professor 
Xu Zhangrun of Beijing’s Tsinghua University, on February 5, posted scathing 
criticism of Xi Jinping and the Chinese authorities captioned “Angry People
No Longer Fear”, that went viral on China’s social media. He was arrested 
shortly thereafter. There were similar displays of anger by other Chinese 
intellectuals and even one Supreme Court judge!
Videos surfaced of Wuhan residents shouting “fake, fake” and “this is 
not real” during an inspection by Politburo member Sun Chunlan. A call by
Wuhan Party Secretary Wang Zhonglin, a close associate of Xi Jinping, to 
“carry out gratitude education among the citizens of the whole city, so that 
they thank the General Secretary [Xi Jinping], thank the Chinese Communist 
Party, heed the Party, walk with the Party, and create strong positive energy”
evoked sharp rebukes and widespread anger. Chu Zhaoxin, a local journalist
posted (March 7) an article on his public WeChat account entitled “Have 
a Bit of Conscience: It’s Not Time to Ask the People of Wuhan for their 
Thanks”, adding that Wang Zhonglin’s timing was “insensitive”. He said, “If 
this is Wang Zhonglin’s idea, I think he needs to educate himself. You are a 
public servant, and your job is to serve the people. Now the people you serve
are broken, the dead are still cold, and the tears of the living have not yet dried.
The sick have not yet recovered, and much of their dissatisfaction is completely 
– 151 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
reasonable. Rather than blaming the people in Wuhan you serve for not being
grateful, you should reflect and be ashamed because you and your team are not 
working properly.” Predictably, the post was removed by March 7 night. The 
South China Morning Post reported (February 18) that He Weifang, Professor 
of Law at Peking University, shared a 2-page handwritten article with friends 
on WeChat on February 17, calling for press freedom. Xu Zhiyong, a former 
law lecturer and founder of the social campaign New Citizens Movement,
was arrested on February 15 for his article of February 3, wherein he urged Xi
Jinping to step down for his “inability to handle major crises”.
With their image substantively dented, if not damaged, Chinese President 
Xi Jinping and the CCP have a long and arduous road ahead to revive economic 
growth and create jobs. A top priority will be to rebuild and restore public trust 
which is crucial to the CCP’s legitimacy as the sole ruling party. For Xi Jinping,
it is imperative that he demonstrates that the ‘China Dream’ and China’s goal
of becoming “a major world power with pioneering global influence” remain 
intact. China will need to try and reestablish international supply chains,
but more important will be whether global markets will be willing and in a
position to procure and absorb Chinese products as they themselves struggle 
to recover from the after effects of the coronavirus epidemic. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on March 
15, 2020.) 
– 152 – 
22. China’s Economic Revival will Face Serious 
Headwinds 
Quite apart from the huge tragic cost to human life caused by the coronavirus 
(COVID-19) pandemic, mishandling of which by China’s leadership has 
angered and frustrated the country’s citizens as evidenced by the riots at the 
border check-post between Hubei and Jiangxi provinces on March 28, the 
pandemic has severely impacted China’s economy. The epidemic virtually
stopped China’s economic growth for nearly three months and rendered 
millions jobless. Unemployment has risen to over 6 per cent. China’s services 
sector alone suffered an estimated loss of US$ 144 billion each week. Financial 
services assess a 30 per cent contraction of the Chinese economy and Chinese 
economists estimated that, if the epidemic was not contained by midFebruary, China’s growth rate could drop by 2 per cent. Recovery has been 
slow, prompting, according to a Hong Kong-based Chinese magazine, leading 
Chinese businessmen like Ma Yun (‘Jack’ Ma) and Liu Chuanzhi, founder of 
Lenovo, to sign a 9-point letter addressed to Chinese President Xi Jinping 
reviving demands for comprehensive reforms, including of the economy.
Economic losses have been widespread and have adversely affected almost 
all sectors. Bloomberg financial services reported a contraction of 9.9 per cent 
in incomes of central and local governments in the first two months of the year 
compared to the previous year and called it the “deepest fall since February 
2009”. It said, “Tax revenue declined more than 11 per cent, with drops in 
value-added taxes, corporate income taxes and car purchase taxes”. It noted,
“Spending also dropped, but a surge in outlays on health-care and social 
security kept the decline to 2.9 per cent from a year ago.”
Already, because of the economic slowdown and US-China trade 
war, Reuters had reported on January 22, that about two-thirds of China’s
provinces, regions and municipalities had cut their 2020 growth targets from
the previous year. These included Beijing, Guangdong, Zhejiang, Henan,
Hainan, and Fujian. Beijing, Shanghai, and the southern export hub of 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Guangdong—all economic high performers that dropped their targets from 
6-6.5 per cent growth to “around 6 per cent” in 2020, in line with the expected
change in the national target. According to preliminary statistics released by
local governments, at least 11 provincial-level regions missed their 2019 Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) targets.
Detailing the extent of damage, Lu Hai, Professor at Peking University,
on March 25, said that a joint survey by Peking University’s Guanghua School 
of Management and China’s largest hiring platform Zhaopin, revealed that 
job openings in China for the first two months of 2020 dropped more than 
30 per cent as the coronavirus epidemic severely disrupted economic activity.
Hardest hit were the media, entertainment, sports and services sectors, all of 
which saw recruitments fall more than 40 per cent over the past year in the 
first two months of 2020. The Information Technology (IT), telecom, and 
internet sectors followed with advertisements for new jobs dropping by over 
30 per cent. The survey revealed that smaller firms suffered more. Companies
with staff strengths of more than 10,000 advertised 15 per cent fewer new 
jobs, companies with between 20 and 99 employees advertised 30 per cent
fewer recruitments and firms with less than 20 personnel advertised 40 per
cent fewer job openings.
China’s leaders, and particularly Chinese President Xi Jinping, have 
been straining to revive the economy because they consider it domestically 
and geopolitically important to achieve the ‘China Dream’ by the hundredth 
year of the founding of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in 2021 and
keep China on track to become “a major world power with pioneering global
influence” by 2049—the centenary year of the establishment of the People’s
Republic of China (PRC). The former includes doubling of incomes by 2020 
and the latter implies acquiring the capability to rival the US and be able 
to influence and create world organisations. Failure to achieve these goals
and bring growth back to a reasonable level would impact adversely on their
authority and legitimacy. However, despite their efforts, economic recovery
has been slow. 
As early as February 3, when there was still no easing of the coronavirus
epidemic in China, Xi Jinping told local officials during a meeting of the
Politburo Standing Committee—the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) 
– 154 – 
CHINA’S ECONOMIC REVIVAL WILL FACE SERIOUS HEADWINDS 
apex body—that some of the actions taken to contain the virus were
harming the economy and urged them to refrain from “more restrictive 
measures”. He said some of the steps had sown fear among the public.
Separately, China’s provincial-level governments were permitted to issue
a further Yuan 290 billion (US $41.6 billion) of Special-Purpose Bonds
(SPBs) adding to the Yuan 1 trillion of such debt approved in November
to boost infrastructure spending amid an already slowing economy now hit
also by the epidemic.
On February 23, Chinese President Xi Jinping directly exhorted over 
170,000 officials across the country to “prevent the economy from slipping out
of a reasonable range”. He expressed concern about China’s role in global trade
and said: “[We] need to secure the smooth operation of foreign trade supply
chains and stabilize [China’s] share in the international market.” In a bid to 
push these efforts, Xi Jinping claimed at a meeting of the Politburo Standing
Committee (PBSC) on March 4, that there had been overall improvement 
in the epidemic situation across China and in the resumption of economic 
activities. He stressed the need to promote international cooperation and
maximise China’s role as a “responsible great power”.
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang convened a State Council Executive 
Meeting on March 10, to call for more efforts to stabilise foreign investment.
The meeting decided to: (i) shorten the negative list of sectors restricting 
foreign investment and expand the list encouraging foreign investment; (ii) 
refund all export tax rebates in full and on time, except for those for energy
intensive, polluting, and natural resource-related products; and (iii) encourage
financial institutions to increase foreign trade loans by deferring principal and
interest payments. On March 11, the National Development and Reform
Commission (NDRC) published a policy focussing on stabilising foreign
investment. Stating that it wants to boost foreign investment, the NDRC 
said big investments will get some benefits and it will coordinate with other 
ministries to iron out problems for investments of over US$ 1 billion in the 
manufacturing and high-tech sectors.
China has kept its strategic interests in mind. Chinese companies have 
stepped up production of medical equipment and supplies like respirators,
masks and gloves, to take advantage of the urgent global demand and 
– 155 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
simultaneously expand their markets. China also took benefit of the drop in
oil prices to an 18-year low and OilChem China purchased almost 1.5 million 
tonnes of commercial crude oil to add to its strategic oil stockpiles on March 
7, the day after talks between the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) and Russia collapsed and prices began to plummet. A 
manager at a Chinese oil storage company said, “All of China’s coastal storage
tanks and those near rivers are all booked, wherever they are in the country”.
The total quantum of oil in OilChem China’s “strategic storage” is now 29.45 
million tonnes. 
To ameliorate distress, China decided to provide medium-term funding
to banks and cut the interest rate. More than 300 Chinese companies,
including Xiaomi, China’s ride hailing company Didi Chuxing, facial
recognition company Megvii Technologies and internet security company
Qihoo 360 are seeking bank loans totalling at least US $8.2 billion to ease
the impact of the coronavirus epidemic.This has been accompanied by efforts
to revive economic activity and resume production. Transport authorities
waived toll taxes and village cadres encouraged workers to return to their
work place. Xinhua Daily, reported on March 14, that to encourage the
service industry’s recovery, the Nanjing government has begun handing out
coupons worth Yuan 318 million (US $45million) each with a monetary
value of Yuan 50 Yuan or 100. These include a dining coupon, book coupon, 
village tour coupon, living subsidy, labour union coupon, etc. Among the
cities resorting to such monetary encouragement it listed: Macao issuing
electronic coupons worth M$ 3000 (US $375) to each resident; Hong Kong
announcing financial support totalling HK $120 billion (US $15.4 billion),
including giving HK $10,000 to each person over 18 years old; Ji’nan city,
Shandong Province issuing Yuan 20 million worth cultural consumption
coupons; De city, Zhejiang province issuing Yuan 10 million in travel
coupons; Zhejiang Provincial Culture and Tourism Department providing
Yuan 1 billion to stimulate cultural and tourism consumption and Yuan
100 million in gifts directly to people; and Ningbo city, Zhejiang province
issuing Yuan 100 million in coupons. In Jiangsu province, several senior
leaders went to restaurants or stores to encourage people to go out and
spend money. 
– 156 – 
CHINA’S ECONOMIC REVIVAL WILL FACE SERIOUS HEADWINDS 
Despite these efforts, China’s Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology (MIIT) disclosed that by March 24, only 71.7 per cent of small
and medium-sized enterprises had resumed operations. Another National 
Business Activity Index said the next day that the economy was operating
at 73.9 per cent, or less than three-fourths of normal levels. Identifying 
transportation and energy as two pertinent indicators, the New York-based 
Rhodium Group observed there were 82 per cent fewer trips in the 25
days following the Lunar New Year in 2020 compared to 2019, signalling
that workers were not returning from the countryside. It observed that coal 
consumption by the six largest power plants in China fell over 40 per cent,
property sales in major cities were near zero till March, and that government 
and private surveys had recorded major contractions in manufacturing and 
services. Economists have observed that if the economy doesn’t get rebooted 
quickly, the damage will be intense and long-lasting.
A gradual improvement was reported by end March 2020. The official The 
Paper stated that businesses are reopening and observed, “Big data from Baidu
searches shows that, at present, over 50 per cent of offline [businesses] have
resumed work nationally.” It said, “The percentage of offline [businesses] that
have resumed work exceeds 63 per cent in Xining, Dalian, and Changchun,
which lead the country in this respect.” Separately, Xinhua reported that less
than half of small and medium enterprises are back at work. It cited Ministry of 
Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) figures to say,“Around 45 per cent
of China’s Small and Medium sized-Enterprises (SMEs) had resumed work” by
March 6, up from the 32.8 per cent of February 26. A magazine reporting on the
coal industry, however, said, “The capacity utilization rate as of March 3 [of coal
mines was] 83.4 per cent, according to official data from China’s National Energy
Administration”, which marked a two-fold increase on that recorded on February
1. The Paper observed, however, that the economy remains “severely depressed”.
The economic damage to the economy caused by the coronavirus 
epidemic has adversely affected private businessmen and entrepreneurs who 
have been complaining since mid-December 2018 that private businesses are 
being denied opportunities and expressed a lack of confidence in the system.
Their dissatisfaction could well hamper China’s efforts to rebuild and revive 
its economy. 
– 157 – 
 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
In mid-December 2018, Renmin University Prof. Xiang Songzuo at
a public function questioned China’s real rate of growth—declaring that a
“research group of an important institution” had released an “internal” report 
stating China’s GDP growth in 2018 was about 1.67 per cent—the poor
state of private businesses in China, and a lack of confidence. Within days,
Chen Hongtian, Chairman of the Cheung Kei Group and member of the
Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), warned nearly
150 tycoons based mainly in Shenzhen and Hong Kong that China’s private 
business entrepreneurs should prepare for a “winter colder and longer than 
expected”. The group included Tencent Chairman Pony Ma, the Chairman 
of carmaker BYD, Wang Chuanfu, and the Chairman of courier service 
SF Express, Wang Wei. They asserted that contrary to assurances, the State 
owned Enterprises (SoEs) have expanded to enter virtually every sector of
economic activity. Supermarket tycoon and founder of Wumart Stores, Zhang
Wenzhong, on November 1, told entrepreneurs at a forum that the courts had 
released him and returned his property after five years of imprisonment and 
cautioned that this could happen to any of them. He said this is because “our 
basic economic system has been written into the country’s and the Party’s 
Constitution. It won’t change.” These complaints continue to be occasionally 
voiced. 
As China tries to revive growth, the Chinese businessmen have now 
again taken up their demand for reforms. Coincidentally, they have increased 
pressure on Chinese President Xi Jinping and the CCP. On March 26, 2020,
the Hong Kong magazine China in Perspective claimed that prominent Chinese 
businessmen had signed and handed over to Chinese Premier Li Keqiang
a letter addressed to Xi Jinping stipulating nine comprehensive demands,
including discarding of China’s aggressive foreign policy. These are: (i) adhere 
to the Deng Xiaoping line; (ii) negate the Cultural Revolution; (iii) start the 
political reform; (iv) do not discriminate against private enterprises; (v) protect 
entrepreneurs; (vi) establish the national discovery fund; (vii) accountability
for the coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic; (viii) release Ren Zhiqiang; and 
(ix) reinvestigate the Li Wenliang incident.The magazine mentioned that five 
senior veteran Chinese Communist leaders, namely Li Ruihuan, Wen Jiabao,
Li Lanqing,Tian Jiyun, and Hu Qili had also signed the letter. Interesting was 
– 158 – 
CHINA’S ECONOMIC REVIVAL WILL FACE SERIOUS HEADWINDS 
the magazine’s disclosure that Chinese billionaire tycoon and ‘princeling’ Ren 
Zhiqiang has been detained at the Changping Mangshan Base of the Beijing
Municipal Commission for Discipline Inspection. The timing of this news 
comes at a difficult time for Xi Jinping and appears to confirm that, at the 
least, a group of powerful ‘princelings’ is opposed to him.
As China strives to energise growth and rebuild economic growth,a lot will 
depend on the global economy and the attitudes of other countries. US-China 
rivalry will probably escalate. As the US, Europe and other countries grapple
with the coronavirus pandemic, trade will be limited and low on their list of 
priorities. China may hope to capitalise on distractions and plummeting stock 
markets to acquire hi-technology, pharmaceutical and other technologies and
companies, but suspicions and its negative image could be major impediments.
Current reports of Chinese companies stepping up production to meet global
demand for respirators, masks, gloves and other urgently needed medical 
equipment, many of poor quality, will add to reservations about China. There 
is likely to be resistance to China’s efforts to enlarge its global market share.
Countries will introspect and reexamine current trade policies, as should 
India, with priority on eliminating dependence on a single source of supply,
especially in vital sectors of national importance like pharmaceuticals,precision 
engineering, communications, etc. With the possibility of biological warfare 
now a reality, serious complications for China will be its image, suspicions 
of its role in the pandemic and whether it shared pertinent information on 
the coronavirus epidemic fully and in time. China is likely to face a tough
economic and political climate in the time ahead and blocking discussion on
the pandemic at the UN Security Council only heightens suspicions. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on March 
31, 2020.) 
– 159 – 
23. Dissatisfaction with Chinese 
President Xi Jinping Mounts 
Expressions of popular discontent in China have increased and are mounting 
pressure on Chinese President Xi Jinping and the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP). The widespread anger among Chinese citizens at the lack of 
transparency and attempt to withhold information about the outbreak of 
the coronavirus epidemic was the spark that fanned the latent discontent 
which, provoked by the abolition of term-limits on appointments to China’s
apex posts of President, Vice President and cadres to the Politburo and its 
Standing Committee, has been simmering since the 19th Party Congress 
in October 2017. The death of Wuhan hospital doctor Li Wenliang further 
spiked discontent. A number of reputed Chinese citizens, including many 
Party cadres, or at the least Party members, and at least one former member of 
the CCP’s 350-odd-member powerful Central Committee (CC) and a Judge 
of China’s Supreme Court, have been blunt and direct in their criticism of Xi 
Jinping and his policies.
Criticism has been aimed at the imposition of the progressively increasing 
security controls backed by expanding Party surveillance and centralisation of 
authority. Party presence and surveillance in college and school classrooms as 
well as campuses to monitor the lecturers and teachers has irked academia.
There has been a steady hardening of China’s security establishment 
reflected in the annual enhancements of the national security budget from 
2013—which coincided with Xi Jinping taking over as CCP CC General 
Secretary, Chairman of China’s Central Military Commission (CMC) and 
China’s President. This has been accompanied by a progressive tightening of 
surveillance over the population and introduction of security technologies like 
closed circuit cameras, facial recognition and Artificial Intelligence (AI). Till 
now unexplained absence of Chinese President Xi Jinping—whose activities 
otherwise feature daily on the front pages of Chinese newspapers and as 
the lead news-item on state-owned TV—from January 29 till February 10, 
DISSATISFACTION WITH CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING MOUNTS 
attracted adverse notice with a number of messages on Chinese social media 
criticising the handling of the crisis by the Chinese central and provincial 
governments and many critical of Xi Jinping. At least two reputed academics 
clearly suggested in late January that the poor handling of the crisis would 
have an impact on Xi Jinping’s position!
On March 2 and February 23, 2020, Zhao Shilin, a retired Professor 
of China’s Minzu University, Deputy Director of the Culture and Arts 
Commission and former member of the CCP CC, posted two open letters
to President Xi Jinping. They were scathing in their criticism. In his letter of 
February 23, Zhao Shilin said China had “missed the golden window of time”
around the time of the Chinese New Year, resulting in the “epidemic spreading
with great ferocity”. He described the costs of this mistake as “enormous”
and “unspeakably painful”. Referring to Xi Jinping’s remark that the battle 
against the coronavirus “is a grand test of the capacity of our nation’s system 
of governance”, Zhao Shilin bluntly declared, “Regrettably, I must say, you’re
scoring zero so far!” He identified five factors as responsible, with stringent 
security, ensuring the Party and Xi Jinping’s image and pre-eminence, and 
centralisation of authority, topping the list.The five factors are: (i) the habitual
use of extreme social stability measures; (ii) the institutional practice of only
reporting good news, not reporting the bad; (iii) rigid institutional supremacy;
(iv) loss of a functioning civil society; and (v) lack of information transparency. 
Elaborating on each of them, he said these inhibited cadres and officials from 
doing their job or taking initiatives. He stressed that “people from within and 
without the system are calling for systemic political reform” and that these 
must include implementing the “socialist core values of freedom, democracy,
equality, and rule of law” and guaranteeing the political rights of citizens, such 
as freedom of speech. In the letter of March 2, he reiterated that “there should 
be more than one voice in a ‘healthy society’ to demand free speech”.
Guo Yuhua, a prominent Professor in the Sociology Department of
Beijing’s prestigious Tsinghua University, indirectly criticised Xi Jinping
and the Chinese leadership in her interview with Radio Free Asia,
published on March 3, 2020. While addressing the coronavirus epidemic
and China’s systemic limitations, Guo Yuhua alleged that the CCP’s view 
of human worth remains narrowly utilitarian and inhumane and restricted 
– 161 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
particularly to its usefulness in achieving and maintaining political power.
She was one of the first people to speak out in protest against the overt
official persecution of her colleague Xu Zhangrun, a Professor of Law at
Tsinghua.
He Weifang, Professor of Law at Peking University, shared a two-page
handwritten article with friends on WeChat on February 17, 2020 calling
for press freedom. Though handwritten in an effort to bypass the censors, the 
posts were deleted about an hour after he forwarded the two-page article to 
several chat groups. In his letter, He Weifang said, “I hope the heavy price 
[of the outbreak] will make Chinese authorities come to realise that without 
press freedom, people will live in distress and the government in mendacity.”
He said the absence of press freedom limited the country’s ability to develop
good governance.
A lengthy article criticising the shortcomings in governance, not allowing
civil society to have a larger role, suppression of free speech, prediction of a 
far more serious fallout for the Chinese economy, and referring to Tsinghua
University Professor Xu Zhangrun’s recent lengthy article, was posted on
February 13, on the public social media account of Duan Zhanjiang, Judge of
the Supreme People’s Procuratorate, China’s version of a Supreme Court. The 
post carried the curious disclaimer that these were not the personal views of 
the judge. 
Others also posted articles on their public social media accounts, similarly
risking almost certain punitive action. Reputed Tsinghua University Professor 
Xu Zhangrun authored a 6,246-word essay on February 5, captioned “Angry
People No Longer Fear”, which went viral on China’s social media. It accused 
China’s leaders and specifically Xi Jinping of being out of touch with the
people’s needs and perpetuating an elite with so-called “Red Genes”. It 
accused Xi Jinping and a “small circle of leaders” of creating a “state within 
a state” and engaging in “big data terrorism”. He charged, “The political 
system has collapsed under the tyranny, and a governance system [made up]
of bureaucrats, which has taken [the Party] more than 30 years to build has 
floundered”. He accused the authorities of spending the “taxpayers’ hardearned money for feeding the massive internet police to monitor every word
and deed of nationals”. Xu Zhangrun said the authorities have not only “stifled 
– 162 – 
DISSATISFACTION WITH CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING MOUNTS 
public discussion of all ideas of life, but also stifled social communication and 
early warning mechanisms that existed originally” and blamed this for the 
failure of the authorities in Hubei to take precautions to control the epidemic.
He called Xi Jinping a “political tyrant”, declared “the people no longer fear”
and “the Sun will eventually come to this land of freedom!” Xu Zhangrun’s
earlier article published on July 24, 2018, had ricocheted across China creating
a stir among Chinese academics and students. He was then suspended from 
his post, banned from leaving China and not allowed to publish his writings
freely in China. He has since been placed under house arrest, barred from 
social media and cut off from the internet. 
Forty-six-year old Xu Zhiyong,a former Lecturer at the Beijing University
of Post and Telecommunications, posted an article on February 3, urging Xi
Jinping to step down for his “inability to handle major crises”. He called Xi 
Jinping’s political ideology “confusing”, his governance model “outdated” and 
said that he had ruined China with “exhaustive social stability maintenance 
measures”. Xu Zhiyong said, “Seven years ago, I appealed to you to lead 
China to become a nation that respects democracy and the Constitution, but 
in return, I was thrown into jail for four years. And now, your men are still 
looking for me trying to throw me back in jail again. I don’t think you are a 
villain, just someone who is not very smart. For the public’s sake, I’m asking 
you again: step down, Mr Xi Jinping.” 
Acts of apparent subtle protest by official and Party organisations have
also been noticed. People Magazine, a publication under China’s People’s
Publishing House, in its March 2020 edition, published an article captioned
“The Person Who Handed out Whistles” about Ai Fen, Director of the 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) at Wuhan Central Hospital, which treated
several coronavirus patients in December, 2019 and who forwarded the
SARS-Coronavirus Diagnostic Report to Dr. Li Wenliang who then blew
the whistle. The Hubei Province Communist Party authorities removed all
posted versions of the article within three hours. Southern Weekly, a newspaper
owned by the Guangdong Communist Party Committee and based in
Guangzhou city, also published a detailed report on March 11 about Ai Fen
and how the hospital authorities hid the information and forced medical
staff not to talk about the outbreak. 
– 163 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Similarly, the Wall Street Journal reported (March 19) that people were 
‘outraged’ as Chinese propaganda authorities glorified a veteran Xinhua News 
Agency reporter Liao Jun at a news conference in March, for her “heroic”
coverage of the coronavirus epidemic in Hubei province.Gu Wanming,a retired 
Xinhua reporter, reacted with an essay widely circulated on a public socialmedia account stating: “If you have a little conscience, then you should refuse 
the accolade and decline to speak, otherwise people will say that you ‘trod on 
the blood of others to ascend the podium.’”The essay was soon removed. Shao 
Yiming, a prominent virologist who is chief HIV/AIDS expert at the Chinese 
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) was reported by Caixin as 
saying (March 20) that Chinese health authorities initially failed to identify
and control the threats posed by Covid-19 because of “faulty assumptions and 
weaknesses in a carefully constructed direct reporting system”.
Resentment was evident among the populace of Wuhan city, capital of
Hubei province and epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak. On February 14,
they protested against “the Communist government’s suppression of freedom 
of speech and its hiding of information”. When Politburo member and Vice 
Premier Sun Chunlan inspected Wuhan on February 14, after the epidemic
had been brought under control, the residents shouted from their apartments 
“Don’t believe them”,“They are telling lies”,“Cheers, Wuhan People!”“Wuhan 
people, save ourselves!”, etc. That resentment persists was evident in the sharp 
and angry reaction when on March 6, when Wuhan Party Secretary and close 
associate of Chinese President Xi Jinping, Wang Zhonglin called for carrying 
out “gratitude education among the citizens of the whole city, so that they
thank the General Secretary [Xi Jinping], thank the Chinese Communist 
Party, heed the Party, walk with the Party, and create strong positive energy.”
The story was reported in the Changjiang Daily, official newspaper under
Wuhan’s Party Committee and shared widely across social media. In a WeChat 
post on March 7, captioned “Have a Bit of Conscience: It’s Not Time to Ask 
the People of Wuhan for their Thanks”, journalist Chu Zhaoxin described 
Wang Zhonglin’s timing as “insensitive”. Chu Zhaoxin said, “This is public
opinion, this is reality. People who are not blind or deaf can see and hear, and 
those who are not blind can feel it. If this is Wang Zhonglin’s idea, I think 
he needs to educate himself. You are a public servant, and your job is to serve 
– 164 – 
DISSATISFACTION WITH CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING MOUNTS 
the people. Now the people you serve are broken, the dead are still cold, and 
the tears of the living have not yet dried. The sick have not yet recovered, and 
much of their dissatisfaction is completely reasonable. Rather than blaming
the people in Wuhan you serve for not being grateful, you should reflect and 
be ashamed because you and your team are not working properly. “ The post 
was removed by late night on March 7.
China’s leadership has taken note of this outburst of criticism. More than 
a month after the National Supervisory Commission (NSC) launched an
investigation into the handling of the case of Dr. Li Wenliang, a whistleblower 
doctor in Wuhan who was punished by local authorities, it reported on March 
19 that the local police and Wuhan Public Security Bureau had revoked the 
reprimand issued to him,apologised to Dr.Li Wenliang’s family and disciplined 
two police officers who oversaw the case. The NSC also acknowledged the
good that Li Wenliang had done which “helped to push for the strengthening
of virus prevention and control.”In an attempt to deflect and blunt criticism of 
the regime, the NSC asserted that Li Wenliang was a Party member and not 
a so-called “opposition figure”.
Further indication of the extent of discontent surfaced last week with 
the report that children of high-level veteran Party cadres, also called
‘princelings’, posted on WeChat a call for an “Emergency Enlarged Meeting
of the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) Politburo” to discuss Xi Jinping’s 
replacement. Radio France International (March 22) and Voice of America
(March 23) also reported this. Chen Ping, son of a former high ranking
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) scientist and himself a ‘princeling’and owner
of the Hong Kong-headquartered Sun TV,said the meeting had a 13-point
agenda and was to “discuss whether Xi Jinping is suitable to continue to be
the President of the country, the CCP’s General Secretary, and Chairman of
the Central Military Commission.” He said the ‘princelings’ had suggested
constitution of a three-person group with Li Keqiang, Wang Yang, and
Wang Qishan to organise the meeting. Stating that the post reflected many
people’s thoughts, Chen Ping added, “Now eventually it needs a (solution
to fix the current policy) and it cannot always be this way. It is not good for
China if the current policies continue.” Sun TV has offices in Shanghai and
Beijing and focusses on China’s elite and the Chinese diaspora. 
– 165 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Opposition has been mobilised not only by mishandling of the outbreak 
of the coronavirus epidemic. Pools of anger already existed among the over 
4,500 officers of the PLA dismissed on charges of corruption and their
extended families; the almost one million Party members and cadres, including
175 at the level of Vice Minister expelled for corruption and violations of
Party law; and academics and students stifled by the presence in college and
school classrooms, campuses and libraries of Party cadres and ‘student spies’.
These resentments coalesced with the anger of the millions of jobless and
unemployed.
The appearance of the WeChat post by some ‘princelings’, further 
publicised out of Hong Kong, hints at serious inner-Party conflict. While 
the CCP will emerge bruised, it will remain intact, but Xi Jinping faces a
potentially troubled period of uncertainty ahead. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on March 
26, 2020.) 
– 166 – 
24. Chinese President Xi Jinping Reacts to 
Inner Party Opposition 
After an extended hiatus when Covid-19 and the economy appeared to 
preoccupy the Chinese leadership, Chinese President Xi Jinping fired a 
warning shot across the bow of opponents and potential opponents in the 
middle and higher echelons of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). A 
meeting of the Politburo on April 17, 2020, chaired by Chinese President Xi 
Jinping approved the establishment of a new ‘Small Group’ on Security. It also 
approved its membership.
Designated the “Safe China Construction Coordinating Small Group”,
China’s official news agency Xinhua said (April 21) the new organisation’s
declared task is to: “Prevent and crack down on activities that endanger 
the political security of the country”! Reflecting the Party’s anxieties about 
domestic social unrest, it quickly held its first meeting on April 21. This small 
group is headed by Guo Shengkun, Politburo (PB) member and Secretary 
of the Political and Legal Affairs Commission (PLAC), which is at the 
apex of China’s security apparatus. All the nine members of the “Safe China 
Construction Coordinating Small Group” are Xi Jinping loyalists, with some 
continuing in office beyond what was the age for retirement as per the CCP’s 
convention till 2017. Shaken by the failed grab for power in 2012 by Zhou 
Yongkang, who was then Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) member 
and Chairman of the Political and Legal Affairs Commission and informally
referred to as China’s ‘Security Czar’, Xi Jinping has ensured since coming to 
power at the 18th Party Congress in 2012 that his, and the CCP’s, grip over 
the country’s security apparatus and Chinese society is firm and unyielding.
Xi Jinping has since then headed the PLAC with a handpicked Politburo 
member as Secretary.
Xi Jinping has paid a lot of attention to security and maintenance of public 
order, or “social stability” as it is euphemistically called, including at the micro 
level. At the Central Political and Legal Work Conference in January 2019, he 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
announced that China’s leadership has accorded higher priority to politicallegal work since the 18th Party Congress. Chinese President Xi Jinping has
also made major changes in China’s security structure. The National Security
Commission (NSC) (ѝཞഭᇦᆹޘငઈՊ) was set up in November 2013; 
the National Supervisory Commission (ഭᇦⴁሏငઈՊ) was established in
2018; and the People’s Armed Police (PAP) (ѝഭӪ≁↖㻵䆖ሏ䜘䱏) was 
restructured in 2017-18. Since their establishment, the NSC and National 
Supervisory Commission have extended the Party’s and central government’s 
authority throughout the country and set up subordinate offices in provinces 
and counties. 
The new “Safe China Construction Coordinating Small Group” is an 
organisation with an apparent different focus. It has a very wide ambit and 
the task of preventing “activities that endanger the political security of the 
country”, gives it sanction to monitor the political and other activities of Party
members. This encompasses not only sabotage and subversion, but all other 
activities that could be deemed to threaten the ‘Party Centre’ or weaken the 
CCP. It can be anticipated to reinforce the Party’s anti-corruption body, the 
Central Discipline Inspection Commission. The organisation has been set up
at this time when, provoked by mishandling of the coronavirus pandemic at
Wuhan, there is increasing criticism from various sections of Chinese society
directed at the CCP and Xi Jinping personally. Reflecting the public mood, 
some Party members and cadres too joined academics, intellectuals, students,
economists, ‘private’ entrepreneurs and others, and posted their criticism on 
personal or official public social media accounts, risking certain punishment.
Some even called for Xi Jinping to step down. There is discontent also among
the millions of unemployed workers and demobilised soldiers and veterans who 
have not been rehabilitated or feel they have not got their due.The coronavirus,
or COVID-19, pandemic, which has adversely impacted the economy and 
rendered millions more jobless, has added to China’s economic difficulties.
Worrying Xi Jinping in particular would be the two letters purported to have 
been written by ‘princelings’, China’s influential and powerful elite consisting
of the children and relatives of veteran Party leaders.
The brief bio-profiles of the nine members of the “Safe China Construction 
Coordinating Small Group”are given below: (i) Guo Shengkun: He is 65 years 
– 168 – 
CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING REACTS TO INNER PARTY OPPOSITION 
old. He is from Jiangxi province and was Minister of Public Security from 
2012 till October 2017. He entered politics in 2004 in the Guangxi Zhuang 
region after working in State-owned Enterprises (SoEs) and the non-ferrous 
metals industry for over 20 years. He became Party Secretary of the GuangxiZhuang Autonomous Region in 2007. (ii) Zhao Kezhi: He visited India in 
October 2018. In addition to being Minister for Public Security, Zhao Kezhi 
has worked closely with two of Xi Jinping’s long time confidants, namely, Li 
Zhanshu and Guo Shengkun. Zhao Kezhi was again appointed Minister of
Public Security at the 19th Party Congress in October 2017. (iii) Zhao Qiang:
Born on April 25, 1960, Zhou Qiang was appointed Party Secretary of Hunan
in April 2010 making him one of the youngest provincial Party Secretaries in 
the country. He has headed the Communist Youth League and in March 2013,
was appointed President of the Supreme People’s Court. He is considered to 
be aligned with Xi Jinping and speaking at a Supreme People’s Court meeting
on January 14, 2017, asserted: “[China’s courts] must firmly resist the Western 
idea of ‘constitutional democracy’ and ‘judicial independence’. Describing
them as erroneous Western notions that threaten the leadership of the ruling
Communist Party and defame the Chinese socialist path on the rule of law, he 
said, “We must stay firm on the Chinese socialist path on the rule of law”. (iv)
Zhang Jun: He has had a steady, uninterrupted rise in China’s law enforcement 
system. In February 2017 he was appointed Minister of Justice and in March 
2018 took over as Procurator General. (v) Chen Yixin: A “Cultural Revolution 
Rusticated Youth”, Chen Yixin joined the CCP in 1982. He spent his entire 
career in Zhejiang where he proved himself in the Wenzhou City Party
Committee. He was brought to Beijing by Xi Jinping as Deputy Director in 
the CCP CC’s Central Small Leading Group on Comprehensively Deepening
Reform in the General Office. He is now Secretary General of the Political and 
Legal Affairs Commission (PLAC). (vi) Chen Wenqing: Born in 1960, he is a 
graduate of the Department of Law, Southwest University of Political Science 
and Law and joined work in 1984. He served for 12 years in the public security
apparatus of Sichuan and later from 2006 in Fujian, where he subsequently 
served as Secretary of the Provincial Discipline Inspection Commission. He 
was brought to Beijing in 2012 by Xi Jinping as Deputy Secretary of the Central
Discipline Inspection Commission till his appointment in November 2016 as 
– 169 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Minister of State Security. (vii) Tang Yijun: A former Governor of Liaoning,
Tang Yijun was formally appointed as China’s new Minister of Justice by the 
Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress on April 29, 2020. It 
is significant that he was invited to attend the first meeting of the “Safe China 
Construction Coordinating Small Group” on April 21, though he was at that
time only Acting Minister of Justice. Tang Yijun spent the first 40 years of his 
career in Zhejiang, eventually becoming its Deputy Party Secretary and later
Governor of Liaoning since October 2017. Zhejiang is one Xi Jinping’s key 
power bases and this, along with Tang Yijun being promoted twice in two and 
a half years, strongly suggests that he is Xi Jinping’s ally. (viii) Wang Ning: A 
highly decorated military officer, 1955-born Gen Wang Ning was brought to
the People’s Armed Police (PAP) from the People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
in December 2013 when Xi Jinping undertook a major reshuffle of the PAP.
PAP Commander Wang Ning, who has worked with Xi Jinping in Fujian,
participated in the Sino-Vietnam War on the Yunnan border. (ix) Wang
Renhua: His appointment to this sensitive position indicates he is trusted by
Xi Jinping and the Central Military Commission (CMC) leadership. Little 
else is yet known about him.
Armed with wide ranging powers, the “Safe China Construction 
Coordinating Small Group”certainly reports directly and only to Xi Jinping. It 
appears similar to a Central Small Leading Group, but is chaired by a Politburo 
member. While little is presently known of its functions, it will probably
investigate cases and decide on punishments in secrecy while reporting to, and 
obtaining approvals directly from, Xi Jinping. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on April 
29, 2020.) 
– 170 – 
25. Xi Jinping Shores up Position to Fend off 
Opponents 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) General Secretary and Chinese President 
Xi Jinping and the CCP have been badly bruised by public criticism, which 
was accentuated by the initial mishandling of the coronavirus epidemic in 
Wuhan. After an extended hiatus, which included Xi Jinping’s unexplained 
disappearance from public view at the peak of the crisis between January 29 
and February 10, Xi Jinping is now demonstrating his political authority and 
influence to shore up his position and fend off opponents.
Reviving the economy is important for the CCP to retain legitimacy. It is 
domestically and geopolitically important for it to achieve the ‘China Dream’
by the hundredth year of the founding of the CCP in 2021, and keep China 
on track to become “a major world power with pioneering global influence”
by 2049—the centenary year of the establishment of the People’s Republic 
of China (PRC). By announcing these goals at the 18th and 19th Party 
Congresses respectively, Xi Jinping staked his prestige and personal reputation 
on these. The former includes doubling of incomes by 2020 and the latter 
envisages acquiring the capability to rival the US and influence and create 
world organisations. Failure to achieve these ‘Two Centenary’ goals and bring 
growth back to a reasonable level would impact adversely on the CCP and Xi 
Jinping’s personal authority and legitimacy.
Resentment has been brewing, especially since the 19th Party Congress 
in October 2017 and the National People’s Congress (NPC) Plenum that 
followed in March 2018, when Xi Jinping abolished term limits on China’s 
top posts of President and Vice President. These were instituted by Deng 
Xiaoping as safeguards against a single leader becoming too powerful. Many 
serving as well as retired and veteran Party cadres and members, a number 
who had suffered during the Cultural Revolution decade, publicly declared 
they did not want a return to the ‘one man rule of Mao’! Rising prices, growing 
inflation and the unemployed, whose number burgeoned from 25 million to 
 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
an estimated 70 to 80 million by March 2020, added to the discontent. Exservicemen and PLA veterans also had complaints. Academics, students and 
intellectuals had grievances provoked by enhanced ideological and political 
education in colleges and schools, increased Party surveillance of Professors 
and Lecturers, and deployment of Party members in classrooms even of 
primary schools. The ‘social credit management system’ to be implemented 
across China by the end of this year is a source of constant worry for the
Chinese. 
The economic slowdown because of the US-China trade war and now 
COVID-19 has aggravated the widespread discontent. China’s ‘private’
businessmen and entrepreneurs have since mid-December 2018, complained
that private businesses are being denied opportunities, and have expressed a 
lack of confidence in the system.They have asserted that contrary to assurances,
State owned Enterprises (SoEs) have expanded to enter virtually every sector
of economic activity. These businessmen include tycoons like Chen Hongtian,
Chairman of the Cheung Kei Group and member of the Chinese People’s
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), Zhang Wenzhong, founder of 
Wumart Stores, Pony Ma, Chairman of Tencent, Wang Chuanfu, Chairman 
of carmaker BYD and Wang Wei, Chairman of courier service SF Express. In 
mid-December 2018,Renmin University Professor Xiang Songzuo questioned
China’s real rate of growth, its poor state of private businesses, and the lack of 
confidence. He revealed that an “internal”report had stated that China’s Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) growth in 2018 was about 1.67 per cent!
With bleak prospects for an early economic recovery, Chinese economists 
have been debating on whether China should at all mention a growth target in 
the report to be presented at the NPC on May 22, 2020. Ma Jun, an academic 
member of the People’s Bank of China’s (PBoC’s) monetary policy committee,
recommended it be dropped “because growth will largely depend on how the
pandemic develops in Europe and the United States.” Yu Yongding, a former 
PBoC adviser, urged the government to mention a target even if it is low.
Xu Xiaonian, a Professor of Economics and Finance at the China Europe
International Business School, was blunt and cautioned that “as long as the
pandemic in Europe and America is not over, Chinese export companies will
have no orders, workers will have no wages and there will be no consumption 
– 172 – 
XI JINPING SHORES UP POSITION TO FEND OFF OPPONENTS 
and a recession is inevitable”. He said, “We are not only short of food and 
oil, but we are also short of markets; we are short of orders. Our per capita
GDP is one-fifth of that of the United States and one-fourth that of Europe.
The domestic purchasing power cannot support our enormous manufacturing 
capacity.” He added, “We still lack raw materials, especially the technologyintensive basic raw materials, which must be imported from South Korea,
Japan and Germany. We lack technology, and technology cannot be developed
rapidly when we close the door.”
The seriousness of the bleak economic situation was reflected by the People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) Daily, which on May 5 published an essay titled: “We 
Should Guard against the ‘High Explosive Point’ of the Strategic Financial 
‘Chess Game’ and Earnestly Safeguard the National Financial Security”. The 
slow pace of economic recovery additionally prompted prominent Chinese 
businessmen like Jack Ma, founder of the Alibaba Group, and Liu Chuanzhi,
founder of Lenovo, to sign and personally hand over to Chinese Premier Li 
Keqiang on March 26, 2020, a nine-point letter addressed to President Xi 
Jinping reviving demands for comprehensive reforms.
Criticism increased with the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
Among the critics were ordinary Chinese, academics, students, senior
Party cadres and officials. Criticism centered mainly on the Party
controlling everything; progressively increasing and stringent security 
controls; expanding Party surveillance; undue centralisation of authority;
and discarding of Deng Xiaoping’s policy of “lie low, bide your time”. A
number of Party cadres and officials in Chinese think-tanks have in private
conversations blamed Xi Jinping’s aggressive foreign policy for China’s 
growing international isolation, rapidly deteriorating relations with the
US and poor international image. Rare for China, Xi Jinping has been
criticised by name, with calls for him to step down.
Noticed were acts of apparent subtle protest by official and Party
organisations. People Magazine, a publication under China’s People’s 
Publishing House and Southern Weekly, a newspaper owned by the Guangdong
Communist Party Committee and based in Guangzhou city, published reports 
praising Dr Ai Fen of Wuhan Hospital in the March 2020 edition and on 
March 11 respectively. 
– 173 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Public indication of the seriousness of discontent surfaced on March 22, 
with reports that children of high-level veteran Party cadres,called ‘princelings’,
had posted a call on WeChat for an “Emergency Enlarged Meeting of the
Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) Politburo” with a 13-point agenda to
discuss Xi Jinping’s replacement.
Probably provoked by this, Chinese President Xi Jinping began taking
steps to contain criticism and fend off opponents from February/March.
From February 3, he began exhorting cadres to resume production and revive 
the economy. To assuage public anger, the reprimand issued to the deceased 
Dr. Li Wenliang was revoked, an apology conveyed to his family and two 
police officers disciplined. Domestic controls were, however, not eased and the 
authorities detained many who had criticised Xi Jinping. Censorship of social
media was enlarged and on April 25, the Publicity Department of the Party
Committee of the Beijing International Studies University notified that the
CCP will impose large-scale censorship and monitoring of Twitter, YouTube 
and Facebook accounts overseas. 
Hong Kong, where Beijing’s inaction, despite the continuous protests
since May 2019, prompted speculation that Beijing was losing its grip,
witnessed action to retrieve the situation. Reports claimed that nearly
4,000 officers from China’s People’s Armed Police (PAP) had joined the
Hong Kong police to monitor protesters and their tactics to deepen the 
PAP’s understanding of the situation. In January and February 2020, two
Xi Jinping loyalists with tough reputations, namely, Luo Huining, former
Shaanxi Party Secretary and Xia Baolong, Xi Jinping’s former deputy in
Zhejiang who had retired, were appointed Director of the Liaison Office of
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) and Head of the
Hongkong Macao Affairs Office (HKMAO) respectively. On April 13, the
Liaison Office of HKSAR stated that it was not subject to the Basic Law.
In a surprise move on April 19, the Hong Kong authorities arrested 15 prodemocracy leaders, including former Legco member Martin Lee and the
owner of Apple Daily Lai Chee-Ying ( Jimmy Lai). The HKMAO, on May
6, warned, “The scorched-earth action of the black-clad violent protesters
is a political virus in Hong Kong society and a big enemy to ‘one-countrytwo-systems’”, adding, “As long as the protesters are not removed, Hong 
– 174 – 
XI JINPING SHORES UP POSITION TO FEND OFF OPPONENTS 
Kong will never be calm.” It said China’s central government will not sit idly
and has the greatest responsibility in maintaining order and safeguarding
national security.
China maintained its tough stance towards Taiwan President Tsai Ingwen and the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) to wear them down. The 
PLA Daily claimed that sentiments favouring forceful reunification of Taiwan 
are rising in China—recently indirectly confirmed by retired PLA Maj Gen
Qiao Liang a reputed ‘hawk’—and Beijing stepped up military pressure with 
increased sailings of PLA Navy (PLAN) warships and its aircraft carrier.
People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) aircraft began overflying
Taiwan and on April 1, they conducted a 36-hour-long-endurance exercise.
Beijing blocked calls for interaction between the World Health Organisation
(WHO) and Taiwan over the coronavirus pandemic. On April 24, the Nanfang
Daily disclosed that Guangzhou city’s National Security Bureau had finished 
investigations into Lee Henley Hu Xiang, a Belizean national and Taiwan 
resident. It said that the investigations “confirmed that the suspect provided a 
large amount of funds to hostile elements in the United States, colluded with 
foreign anti-China forces to intervene in Hong Kong affairs, and funded the 
implementation of criminal activities that endangered our national security.”
He is the first foreigner to be identified for involvement in Hong Kong.
Xi Jinping’s aggressive foreign policy style has not changed. There has 
been no easing of propaganda or military pressure as evidenced by the Xinhua 
article of March 4, threatening the US with stoppage of medical supplies.
China continues to flex its military muscle in the East Sea and substantively
advance its claims over the South China Sea. Despite seeking entry to the
Indian market, China’s official media continue negatively portraying India’s 
economy and health infrastructure. China raised the Kashmir issue for the 
fifth time at the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) on April 8. It 
underlined its comprehensive ties with Pakistan with the first “Sea Guardians 
2020” naval exercises featuring anti-submarine and submarine rescue training
in the Arabian Sea. The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has held at least six
military exercises in Tibet since February/March including a ‘combat’ exercise 
by several helicopters in the Lhasa area on April 21. On April 27, between 300­
500 PLA vehicles were observed in the Tashigong area opposite Demchok. 
– 175 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
There are other indicators suggesting that Chinese President Xi Jinping
has become active in domestic politics to shore up his position and fend off
opponents. On April 8, three Xi Jinping ‘loyalists’ were appointed as new
Party Secretaries. The same day, the Beijing Western District Supervisory
Commission announced the arrest of ‘princeling’ tycoon Ren Zhiqing, a
trenchant critic of Xi Jinping, notwithstanding the ‘princelings’ publicising
their support for Ren Zhiqing and urging Xi Jinping for his release. On
April 14, Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) member and CPPCC
Chairman Wang Yang chaired a meeting of the Committee on Poverty
Alleviation, apparently replacing PBSC member Han Zheng. Poverty
alleviation is a priority for Xi Jinping who promised eradication of poverty
by 2020 in the ‘China Dream’. Han Zheng’s inaction on Hong Kong affairs
had prompted Xi Jinping to say in late January that “those responsible
should resolve it”. 
Significant, however, are two developments which suggest that
discontent within the Party and inner-Party factionalism are causing Xi
Jinping considerable anxiety. On April 17, Xi Jinping chaired a Politburo 
meeting which approved the creation and membership of a new “Safe China 
Construction Coordinating Small Group”. Headed by Guo Shengkun,
Politburo member and Secretary of the powerful Political and Legal Affairs
Commission (PLAC), each of its nine members have been handpicked Xi 
Jinping ‘loyalists’. Xinhua (April 21) mentioned its task as to “prevent and 
crack down on activities that endanger the political security of the country”,
indicating that the “Safe China Construction Coordinating Small Group”has 
a wide, ambiguous ambit. The National Security Commission, National 
Supervisory Commission and Central Discipline Inspection Commission
(CDIC) all have separate defined functions. The ‘Small Group’ will report to 
Xi Jinping.
The other is the Radio Free Asia (April 27) report that Xi Jinping’s
followers held ‘emergency’ meetings at the Ministry of Public Security
(April 20), the Secret Service Bureau of the Ministry of Public Security
(April 21), and the CCP Political and Legal Affairs Commission (April 22).
Radio Free Asia disclosed that at the Secret Service Bureau’s meeting, Wang
Xiaohong, Executive Deputy Minister of Public Security and Director of 
– 176 – 
XI JINPING SHORES UP POSITION TO FEND OFF OPPONENTS 
the Secret Service Bureau stated, “(We) must increase the monitoring of the
‘top leaders’ decision-making power, staff appointment power, and financial
approval power, to let the ‘top leaders’ get used to working and living under
monitoring.”
The last two developments clearly indicate that in addition to the 
widening public dissatisfaction, it is the inner-Party discontent, accompanied
by calls for him to step down that is causing Xi Jinping a lot of anxiety.
However, as demonstrated by the creation of the new ‘Small Group’ and by
Xi Jinping’s personality, he is unlikely to quietly back-off in the face of innerParty opposition.The new ‘Small Group’, on the other hand, is a clear warning
to senior Party echelons, ‘princelings’ and Party veterans to fall in line, but 
whether they will depends on the extent of opposition to Xi Jinping at the
middle and higher echelons of the Party and among Party veterans. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on May 
17, 2020.) 
– 177 – 
26. Qiu Shi Calls for Protecting Xi Jinping as 
“Core” of the Whole Chinese Communist Party 
There have been important developments in China’s domestic politics in 
recent weeks. These have built on the Party’s assessment of Chinese President 
Xi Jinping’s Communist credentials. Coming as these do at a time when Xi 
Jinping and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) are under considerable 
pressure due to domestic criticism and the economic situation, in addition 
to the all-round pressure exerted by the United States which has severely
accentuated China’s difficulties, they assume significance. The CCP’s flagship
theoretical magazine Qiu Shi (Seeking Truth) had in June 2014—within 
nineteen months of Xi Jinping’s assumption to power—described Xi Jinping 
as “one of China’s greatest Communist leaders” who had put forward “new
thinking, new views and new conclusions”! That article signalled Xi Jinping’s
capture of the CCP.
More recently, Qiu Shi (2020/14 dated July 15, 2020) published two 
important articles. One was authored by Xi Jinping and was a selection of 18 
phrases culled from his speeches spread over seven years between December 
2013 and October 2019. Not quite like Mao’s Red Book, it is an attempt to 
more readily publicise and disseminate his thoughts to a national audience.
More important, however, was the accompanying Qiu Shi editorial, which 
definitively seeks to elevate Xi Jinping’s standing in the pantheon of Chinese 
Communist leaders.While Mao obviously stands on a different pedestal as the 
leader who steered the CCP to victory through the arduous Long March and 
as founder of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), this editorial describes 
Xi Jinping alone as the “core of the CCP Central Committee” which, in turn,
is the “core” of the Party. Neither Deng Xiaoping nor Mao Zedong enjoyed 
such preeminence within the CCP as both had powerful veteran and stalwart 
Chinese Communist leaders to contend with. 
Nonetheless, the emphasis on the “two maintenances” and the “two
safeguards” hints at inner-Party differences and suggests that Qiu Shi is trying 
QIU SHI CALLS FOR PROTECTING XI JINPING AS “CORE” OF THE WHOLE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY 
to rally the Party around Xi Jinping. It highlights his contributions, but also 
categorically states that he “personally” commanded the effort to fight the 
coronavirus epidemic—a sensitive topic inside China and the subject of much 
of the criticism. Particularly revealing is the direction that “Party organisations
at all levels, all Party members, especially senior cadres, must follow the Party
Central Committee”, the Party’s line, etc. The Qiu Shi editorial appeared 
weeks before two important events, the annual “informal” gathering of veteran 
leaders at the Beidaihe seaside resort and the Fifth Plenum of the 19th Party
Central Committee recently announced for October 2020.
The lengthy 6,359-word, 6-section editorial contained over 60 references 
to Xi Jinping, making clear his leading position. It credited him and the CCP 
with guiding China to its present stage and asserted that the Chinese people 
are “lucky” to have Xi Jinping as their leader. The editorial especially called 
on Party institutions, Party cadres and Party members to “protect” Xi Jinping
who is the “core” of the CCP and the whole Party. This call is distilled into 
the phrase the “two safeguards”, also translated as the “two defends”. Salient 
highlights of the editorial are given below.
The first few paragraphs of the Qiu Shi editorial stress on Chinese 
President Xi Jinping’s personal leadership and involvement in tackling the 
coronavirus epidemic. It said that under his “personal command” the Party,
government, Army and civil and the East, West, South, North and Centre all 
launched an all-out war against the pandemic. Describing Xi Jinping as the
“core of the Party Central Committee” and the “core of the whole Party”, it 
credited him with working to achieve “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese 
nation”. 
The section captioned “Leadership of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP)” described Xi Jinping’s selection of the 18 phrases. Calling it “the most 
essential feature of socialism with Chinese characteristics”, it averred that this 
“important” article will “further strengthen the ‘four consciousnesses’, ‘four 
self-confidences’ and achieve the ‘two safeguards’ for the entire Party”.
Elaborating on the role of the Party, the section entitled “Party Leads 
Everything” underscored that this “is the fundamental point of China’s
stability, economic development, national unity and social stability”. It listed 
some important points namely: “upholding and strengthening the overall 
– 179 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
leadership of the Party is related to the future and destiny of the Party and
the country”. In this, it said, “There must be no ambiguity and vacillation”.
It added that “without the leadership of the CCP, our country and nation 
would not be able to achieve the achievements it has today, nor can it have the 
international status it has today, with the CCP in power, it is China and the 
Chinese people”. The section highlighted Xi Jinping’s role and emphasised
that he has “strengthened the overall leadership of the Party in all fields”. It 
added,“The core position of General Secretary Xi Jinping and the core position
of the whole Party have been established”. “A big country like ours with a
population of 1.4 billion must have a leader that everyone counts…. a big
Party like ours with more than 90 million party members must have a strong 
core”. It stated that the “sixth plenary session of the 18th Central Committee
of the CCP formally established General Secretary Xi Jinping’s core position
of the Party Central Committee and the core position of the whole Party. The 
19th National Congress of the Party included General Secretary Xi Jinping’s 
core position of the Party Central Committee and the core position of the
whole Party into the Party Constitution”. It called this “the luck of the Party,
the country, the people and the Chinese nation”.
Discussing the “two maintenances”, the article said, “Adhering to the
leadership of the Party is to first uphold the authority of the Party Central
Committee and centralised and unified leadership. This is the highest 
principle of the Party’s leadership. Under the circumstances, it must not 
be vague or shaken”. “Maintenance of authority has always been a major
issue in the building of the Marxist parties. It is vital to ensure the unity
and centralisation of the Party”. It elaborated that “after the Zunyi (Tsunyi)
conference established Comrade Mao Zedong’s leadership position in the 
party Central Committee, our Party began to form a strong leadership core”.
It warned that without the Party’s central authority and centralised unified
leadership, “the Party leadership will inevitably weaken and the Party’s cause 
will inevitably suffer frustration”.
Reiterating Xi Jinping’s position, it recalled that the “Sixth Plenum
of the 18th Central Committee of the Party officially established General
Secretary Xi Jinping as the core of the Party Central Committee and the
entire Party”. It was a “major event related to the authority of the Party 
– 180 – 
QIU SHI CALLS FOR PROTECTING XI JINPING AS “CORE” OF THE WHOLE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY 
Central Committee and the vitality and centralisation of the entire Party”.
Implicitly praising Xi Jinping and justifying his position as the “core” of the
Party, the editorial said, “The political leadership is skilful and superb, the
people’s feelings are sincere and broad, and the historical role is strong and
firm, which fully proves that it is worthy of being the core of the Party Central
Committee and the core of the entire Party”. The editorial said China has
overcome difficulties and “the fundamental reason lies in maintaining the
core position of General Secretary Xi Jinping, the Party Central Committee
and the core position of the entire Party, and resolutely maintaining the
authority and concentration of the Party Central Committee”. It again
emphasised that “unified leadership will unite the entire Party, people of all
ethnic groups across the country”.
Important was the explicit explanation of the “two maintenances”, which 
are essentially one, and is: “maintaining the core position of General Secretary
Xi Jinping means maintaining the authority of the Party Central Committee
and centralised and unified leadership; maintaining the authority of the Party
Central Committee and centralised and unified leadership must first maintain 
the core position of General Secretary Xi Jinping”.
An important feature of the editorial was the introduction of the “two
safeguards”, also translated as the “two defences”, with its clear connotations 
and requirements. The Qiu Shi editorial declared: “To safeguard the core 
position of General Secretary Xi Jinping, the target is General Secretary Xi
Jinping rather than anyone else; to maintain the authority and centralised
unified leadership of the Party Central Committee, the target is the Party
Central Committee and not any other organisation. The authority of the
Party Central Committee determines the authority of Party organisations
at all levels. The authority of Party organisation at all levels comes from the 
authority of the Party Central Committee. The ‘two safeguards’ can neither be 
applied layer by layer nor extended at will”.
These were further reinforced with the exhortation that it is necessary to 
strengthen the “four consciousnesses” and “four confidences” and maintain “a
high degree of consistency with the Party Central Committee, with Xi Jinping
as the core in ideological and political actions”. Importantly, it emphasised,
“Party organisations at all levels, all Party members, especially senior cadres, 
– 181 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
must follow the Party Central Committee, follow the Party’s theory, line, 
principles and policies, follow the Party Central Committee’s decisionmaking and deployment, and unswervingly maintain the core and all aspects
of General Secretary Xi Jinping’s Party Central Committee”.
The editorial stressed that these attributes strengthen the Party’s overall 
leadership. Elaborating this, it pointed out that Xi Jinping has “pioneered 
the proposal that the most essential feature of socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the greatest advantage of the socialist system with Chinese 
characteristics is the leadership of the Party…”. It underscored that the “Party
Central Committee and Xi Jinping have comprehensively strengthened and
continuously perfected the Party leadership”.
The timing of the Qiu Shi editorial’s publication as well as its message 
are important. There are indications that Xi Jinping and the CCP are both 
under pressure, with greater pressure on Xi Jinping. Criticism levelled against
him includes adopting an assertive foreign policy and prematurely challenging
the United States, which is much more powerful than China and has left 
China friendless during the confrontation. There is additionally considerable 
apprehension in the mid to higher echelons of the CCP as to what the US,
which has taken punitive actions against China each week, plans to do next.
A Chinese official writing under the pseudonym Liang Jing wrote on July
22, 2020, that the US Administration knows “that due to his major mistakes 
in the epidemic and the Hong Kong issues, Xi is in his most dangerous 
predicament since taking office.The US has a chance that it dared not imagine:
to force Xi to step down, completely changing the confrontation between the 
US and China”. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on August 
13, 2020.) 
– 182 – 
27. Xi Jinping Launches ‘Yan’an Style’ Campaign
 
to Cleanse China’s Security Apparatus
 
The national security apparatus is the crown jewel of any country. Authoritarian 
regimes pay particular attention to these as they help preserve the regime and 
keep the population compliant and in check. China’s Communist leaders have,
for obvious reasons, been conscious of the importance of the security apparatus.
In the backdrop of the increasing criticism since 2017—including by senior 
Communist cadres and ‘princelings’—of him personally and his policies, Xi 
Jinping too has turned his attention to ensuring the loyalty of the security 
apparatus. He has just this month unleashed a severe year-long ‘rectification’ 
campaign throughout China’s security system.
Acutely conscious that in the previous couple of years a potentially
alternate centre of power led by China’s security czar and Politburo Standing 
Committee (PBSC) member Zhou Yongkang had sought to emerge, Chinese 
President Xi Jinping—ever since he was appointed to China’s top jobs in 
November 2012—retained direct supervision over China’s security apparatus 
by allotting this portfolio to a Politburo (PB), instead of a PBSC, member. He 
also introduced a system whereby each Politburo member submits a report 
each week directly to Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Central Committee 
(CC) General Secretary Xi Jinping. All key positions in the security apparatus 
are held by Xi Jinping loyalists. The security budgets have also risen each year 
during his regime. A couple of years ago the Public Security Bureau (PSB) 
budget was higher than China’s national defence budget and continues to at 
least rival that. While nearly half of all departments, including the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs had their budgets cut in 2020, China’s central public security 
budget alone rose by 0.7 per cent and in the current year, is Yuan 183.272 
billion (US$ 26.2 billion). This PSB budget, incidentally, does not include 
other security-related expenditure such as on stability maintenance, electronic 
and technical surveillance, Ministry of State Security (MoSS), etc., or of the 
provinces. 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Given the importance of the country’s security apparatus—referred to 
as the “knife handle” by Party cadres—China’s leaders have tried to ensure 
that the security system remains loyal to the CCP, and them personally, by
appointing loyalists to head it and in key positions. After Mao Zedong’s death 
and the ouster of CCP CC General Secretary Hua Guofeng and the Gang
of Four in 1979, Deng Xiaoping carried out a clean-up of the security system.
Again, after PBSC member Zhou Yongkang was discredited and subsequently 
arrested in 2012, Xi Jinping’s predecessor CCP CC General Secretary Hu
Jintao sent 3,000 security cadres for ‘reeducation’. This was barely enough in
an organisation with more than 1.97 million personnel. In view of the still 
continuing campaign to weed out “two-faced” Party and military cadres on 
charges of violation of Party discipline and corruption, it is apparent that the 
‘loyalty’ of many including in the security set-up continues to be doubted.
Xi Jinping has undoubtedly been unnerved by the persistent criticism 
aimed at him since late 2017 when he abolished term limits for senior posts—
including by senior Communist cadres and ‘princelings’—which intensified
with the outbreak of the coronavirus epidemic. He effected important 
personnel changes in the Ministry of Public Security (MPS) over the past 
two years, replacing a total of nine ‘leaders’ and additionally established a new 
security body.
On April 21, Xinhua announced that the Politburo had constituted a 
new security body called the “Safe China Construction Coordinating Small 
Group” headed by Guo Shengkun, Politburo member and Secretary of the
Political and Legal Affairs Commission (PLAC), which is at the apex of
China’s security system. All nine members of the Small Group are trusted 
loyalists of Xi Jinping. Interesting is that this Small Group has a wide ambit
and its task of “preventing activities that endanger the political security of the 
country” would give it sanction to monitor the political and other activities of 
Party members. The latter is substantive indication that some of the criticism 
would be known to have originated from senior Party cadres and ‘princelings’.
Nonetheless, criticism continues to be voiced. A number of ‘open letters’
criticising Xi Jinping have stayed for days and even months after being posted
on the internet and before being deleted by the authorities, suggesting the
complicity of elements within the system. Pointing to the importance that 
– 184 – 
XI JINPING LAUNCHES ‘YAN’AN STYLE’ CAMPAIGN TO CLEANSE CHINA’S SECURITY APPARATUS 
Xi Jinping gives to ‘cleaning up’ China’s cyber space was the participation in
the first meeting of the “Safe China Construction Coordinating Small Group
Task Force”on June 8 of Lin Rui,Vice Minister of Public Security in charge of 
cyber security. One of Xi Jinping’s trusted allies, having worked for many years 
in Fujian province where Xi Jinping spent 17 years in the earlier stages of his
political career, Lin Rui has a degree in applied computing and is a specialist
in cyber security and cyber crime prevention.This becomes even more relevant 
consequent to the important article and accompanying commentary published
in the latest issue (2020/14; July 15, 2020) of the flagship Party theoretical 
fortnightly Qiu Shi (Seeking Truth).
Qiu Shi announced the publication of a new book of 18 phrases drawn
from seven years of Xi Jinping’s speeches, crediting him with its authorship.
The quotations highlight the “absolute” and “leading” position of the CCP in 
all matters and declare that had it not been for the CCP’s leadership, China 
would not have achieved the successes it has. It includes the warning that one 
cannot afford to falter even a little bit on the issue of “adherence to the Party’s 
leadership.”The accompanying and especially significant Qiu Shi commentary
hinted at the elevation of Xi Jinping’s position in the Chinese Communist 
pantheon, with implied comparison with Karl Marx! The commentary refers 
to “two safeguards”, which unequivocally call for “protecting” the Central 
Committee which is the “core” of the CCP, with Xi Jinping at its “core” and 
“protecting” Xi Jinping’s position as the “core” of the Central Committee.
On July 8, 2020, Chen Yixin, a trusted associate of Xi Jinping and
alternate member of the 19th CCP CC and Secretary General of the Political 
and Legal Affairs Committee (PLAC), launched a 3-month ( July to October)
pilot programme to prepare for what will be a penetrating nationwide
education and rectification of China’s entire security apparatus next year.
The campaign will encompass all political-legal institutions, including the 
supervision commissions, courts, procuratorates, police and prisons. Chen 
Yixin called it “a self-revolution with the blade inward and bone scraping to 
cure poison”. Chen Yixin said, “We must drain away the filth and bring in
fresh water.” He called for a “turbulent and clear-cut Yangqing style ‘Yan’an 
Rectification Movement’ and ‘soul-stirring Yangwei-style themed education’
to “strive to build a political and legal iron Army that the Party and people 
– 185 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
can trust, trust, and can rest assured”. He explained that the political and 
legal team is an important force to defend the leadership of the Party and
the state power of the people’s democratic dictatorship. He said while the 
system has been increasing its efforts each year to eliminate black sheep, “the 
situation remains grim”. He said because of this, “a self-revolution in the form 
of scraping the bones and drugs should be carried out. The knife should be 
inward, the malignant tumour should be completely cut, the black sheep
should be eliminated, and the political and legal teams should be absolutely
loyal, absolutely pure, and absolutely reliable”. He gave particular stress on 
adherence to “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics 
for the New Era”, earnestly implementing the important instructions of 
General Secretary Jinping and achieving the “two safeguards”. The campaign
will commence at the beginning of 2021 and end in the first quarter of 2022.
Taking the cue from Chen Yixin’s exhortation, the following day ( July
9) China’s Ministry of Public Security convened a meeting on mobilisation 
for the new “Persist in Political Construction of Police, Comprehensively and
Strictly, Govern Police” education and rectification campaign. Speaking at
the meeting State Councilor and Minister of Public Security Zhao Kezhi
emphasised implementation of the ‘spirit’ of Xi Jinping’s guidance, the 
Central Committee’s opinions on political construction, and the ministry’s 
work meeting, strengthening the “four consciousnesses,” “four confidences,” 
and “two safeguards” and “closely centering on loyalty to the Party”, service 
to the people, fair law enforcement, and strict requirements for discipline. He 
said that in its campaign, the ministry must focus on leadership at all levels 
and use “the courage of self-revolution and spirit of rectification (ᮤ仾Ⲵ㋮
⾎),” work to further solidify loyalty, strengthen Party leadership, improve its 
“political ecology,” and make its goals for disciplined work style even stricter.
Zhao Kezhi called on the ministry to address “impurity” of ideology, politics,
organisation, and work style,“get rid of bad apples”, purify its ranks, and ensure 
that the ministry’s ranks “provide a staunch political guarantee for earnestly 
carrying out the New Era mission and tasks entrusted by the Party and people 
well.” 
The rectification campaigns in the PSB and the Procuratorate have 
been publicised by the People’s Daily ( July 9 & 10), which also noted the 
– 186 – 
XI JINPING LAUNCHES ‘YAN’AN STYLE’ CAMPAIGN TO CLEANSE CHINA’S SECURITY APPARATUS 
“two safeguards”. As indicated in Chen Yixin’s speech, the campaign can be 
anticipated to be thorough and result in the dismissal and arrests of numerous 
PLAC cadres. It will include ideological indoctrination, criticism and selfcriticism, which implies persuading people to report on the wrong doings of
others. The campaign appears intended to secure for Xi Jinping full control 
over the law enforcement system, which is the one pillar of the Party-state
where Xi Jinping has never fully consolidated control. The PLAC oversees 
China’s judiciary and law enforcement bodies.
Underlying the campaign’s objectives will be the identification and 
weeding out of those suspected of loyalty to other leaders, thus, securing for Xi
Jinping full control over the law enforcement system. Xi Jinping’s objectives in 
launching such a tough campaign at this time when he is under domestic and
international pressure, would be to stem the criticism of himself and the CCP,
which could undermine his authority. It will also be to try and more effectively
blunt US efforts to undercut the CCP, as indicated by the reported proposal to
deny visas to CCP members. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on July 
27, 2020.) 
– 187 – 
28. Xi Jinping’s Efforts to Consolidate Marxist 
Ideology among CCP Members to Counter US 
Confronted with growing tensions as US-China relations rapidly deteriorate,
Chinese President Xi Jinping has asked Chinese Communist Party (CCP) 
members to prepare for a “protracted war” on multiple fronts. In addition to 
anticipated difficulties on the technology, economy and potentially military 
fronts, China’s Communist leadership has taken special note of repeated 
American statements—particularly by US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo—
about the threat from Chinese Communism. For example, on August 25,
the official CCP mouthpiece the People’s Daily published a lengthy 3-page, 
34,000-character response to Pompeo’s speech of July 23, at the Richard 
Nixon Presidential Library in California.
Fears of a ‘peaceful evolution’ have been a serious concern to the CCP 
leadership since the time of Mao Zedong and, more so after the collapse of the 
Soviet Union. ‘Peaceful evolution’ is interpreted as the US effort to introduce 
multi-party democracy; replace the socialist command economy with a freewheeling capitalist system; and eliminate the CCP’s monopoly as China’s sole 
ruling political party, in other words, dismantling of the CCP.
CCP Central Committee (CC) General Secretary Xi Jinping has 
consequently visibly redoubled efforts to further consolidate Marxist ideology 
and ‘socialism with Chinese characteristics’. Xi Jinping has consistently 
maintained that only “socialism with Chinese characteristics is socialism, 
and not some other doctrine,” and it is a significant ideological issue that 
“concerns the future fate of the Party, the long-lasting peace and stability of 
the country, and the cohesion and solidarity of the nation.” Since the time he 
took over as Party General Secretary at the 18th Party Congress in November 
2012, Xi Jinping has launched numerous campaigns in the Party, military and 
government to stress the importance of Marxism and the CCP. Writing in 
a recent (2020/16; August 16,2020) issue of the Party’s flagship theoretical 
magazine Qiu Shi (Seeking Truth), Xi Jinping emphasised that “the Marxist 
XI JINPING’S EFFORTS TO CONSOLIDATE MARXIST IDEOLOGY AMONG CCP MEMBERS TO COUNTER US 
political economy is an important part of Marxism” and that the foundation 
of China’s “political economy can only be Marxist political economy, not other 
theories”. 
In the wake of steadily increasing US pressure on China in recent months,
escalated by the imposition of sanctions against CCP cadres and proposal to
ban US visas to members of the CCP, a number of new ideological campaigns
have been launched to strengthen adherence by the Party’s 92 million members 
to the CCP’s policies and principles. An earlier editorial in Qiu Shi ( July 15)
exhorted cadres to “protect” Xi Jinping’s position as the “core” and warned 
Party members that “upholding and strengthening the overall leadership of
the party is related to the future and destiny of the Party and the country”.
It emphasised, “There must be no ambiguity and vacillation”. It also cited 
Xi Jinping’s speech to the Politburo on June 29, where he listed five goals
as the Party’s organisational line in the new era. Qiu Shi explained these as 
to: (i) uphold and improve the Party’s leadership and develop socialism with
Chinese characteristics. Xi Jinping stated this was important because political 
and organisational lines are linked. Xi Jinping also highlighted the importance 
of ensuring ideological and political consistency at all levels of the government 
with the Central Committee; (ii) arm the entire Party with the Party’s scientific 
theory. Xi Jinping stated that Marxism should be used as a guide to strengthen
and centralise party thought; (iii) build the Party’s organisational system to 
unify and strengthen grassroots and local governance. Most important was 
to ensure their resolute obedience to the Central Committee; (iv) build the
backbone of the ruling ranks and talent team, focussing on recruiting talented
and virtuous people. Essential to this goal, Xi Jinping said, is to strengthen
the education and training of cadres and deepen cadre system reform efforts;
and (v) build the Party’s organisational system. He focussed on democratic 
centralism as the key to the leadership system of the party, and expressed the 
need to “continuously improve the institutionalisation, standardisation, and 
the scientific level of the Party’s organisational construction.”
On July 8 2020, Xinhua reported the start of a new, comprehensive 
ideological campaign with the CCP CC General Office issuing a “Notice 
of the Central Propaganda Department and the Central Organisation
Department on Earnestly Organising and Studying the Third Volume of Xi 
– 189 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Jinping: The Governance of China”. Published by the Central Propaganda
Department, the third volume of “Xi Jinping: The Governance of China” is a 
selection of 92 reports, talks, comments and speeches of Xi Jinping covering
19 topics and spanning the period October 18, 2017, to January 13, 2020. The 
notice declared that the volume is instrumental in promoting understanding 
of “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New 
Era”, strengthening the “four consciousnesses” (ഋњ᜿䇶), consolidating
the “four confidences” (ഋњ㠚ؑ), and achieving the “two defends” (єњ
㔤ᣔ), and advancing global understanding of the appeal of the Chinese 
system. It stated that “studying the volume is an important political task” ,
and “theoretical study groups of Party committees and Party organizations”
at all levels “should incorporate the volume in their study plans. The same 
applies for Party and cadre schools, as well as universities, Party committee
lecture groups, new era civilisation practice centres, county-level media 
convergence centres, and the ‘Xuexi Qianguo’ learning platform app, so as to 
innovatively advance the “[flying] into the homes of ordinary people of the
Party’s scientific theories”. Lastly, the notice highlighted the need to connect
theory with practice in order to overcome the negative impact of the novel 
coronavirus, ensure economic stability and well-being, achieve a prosperous 
society, combat poverty, and “seize the opportunity to begin a new national 
journey” in constructing socialist modernisation. 
Independently, 60-year-old Chen Yixin, Secretary-General of the
Party’s Political and Legal Affairs Commission (PLAC) and a protege
of Chinese President Xi Jinping, convened a meeting in Beijing on July 8
to launch another new nationwide “education and rectification” campaign,
this time targeting the country security apparatus. In a hard-hitting speech
to officials attending the meeting, Chen Yixin said, “We must scrape the
bone to remove the poison”; and “We must drain away from the filth and
bring in freshwater.” He called for a “turbulent Yangqing style ‘Yan’an 
rectification’, and soul-stirring Yangwei-style themed education which
strives to build a political and legal iron Army that the Party and people
can trust, trust, and can rest assured”. The campaign is initially planned to
be conducted in only five cities and four counties, but will go nationwide
from early 2021.The campaign will come to an end in 2022. It is anticipated 
– 190 – 
XI JINPING’S EFFORTS TO CONSOLIDATE MARXIST IDEOLOGY AMONG CCP MEMBERS TO COUNTER US 
that the campaign will be thorough and result in the dismissal and arrest
of numerous PLAC cadres. 
The following day ( July 9) China’s Ministry of Public Security convened 
a meeting to mobilise personnel for the new “Persist in Political Construction 
of Police, Comprehensively and Strictly Govern Police” education and 
rectification campaign. Delivering a speech to start the campaign, the Minister 
of Public Security (MPS) Zhao Kezhi emphasised implementing the spirit 
of Xi Jinping’s guidance, the Central Committee’s opinions on political 
construction, and the Ministry’s work meeting. He called for strengthening
the “four consciousnesses,” “four confidences,” and “two defends,” and “closely 
centering on loyalty to the Party”, service to the people, fair law enforcement,
and strict requirements for discipline. He said that in its campaign, the 
Ministry must focus on leadership at all levels and use “the courage of selfrevolution and spirit of rectification (ᮤ仾Ⲵ㋮⾎),” further solidify loyalty,
strengthen Party leadership, improve its “political ecology,” and specify stricter 
goals for a disciplined work style. Zhao Kezhi instructed the ministry to
address “impurity” of ideology, politics, organisation, and work style, “get rid 
of bad apples,” purify its ranks, and ensure that its ranks “provide a staunch 
political guarantee for earnestly carrying out the New Era mission and tasks 
entrusted by the Party and people well.” The two campaigns appear designed
to allow Xi Jinping full control over the law enforcement system, which is the 
one pillar of the Party state where he has not fully consolidated control.
Weeks later, the People’s Daily reported the commencement of a new 
campaign aimed at primarily the legal establishment. It said that on July 14,
the CCP CC’s Propaganda Department, Organisation Department, Political 
and Legal Affairs Commission, Cyberspace Administration of China,
General Office of the National People’s Congress Standing Committee,
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Justice, and National Legal Awareness 
Office had jointly issued a notice launching a programme of study and
education about the National Civil Code. The notice called for “thorough
study and propaganda of General Secretary Xi Jinping’s important treatises 
on governing the country fully according to the law, especially the spirit of 
important directives on the civil code,” and study and propaganda on the
significance of the code’s implementation, its basic principles, and its content. 
– 191 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
The notice urged departments to create multimedia news propaganda on Party
and media-affiliated websites, detailed “new media” plans, focussed reports,
authoritative interviews, various commentary series, and propaganda and
activities for “modern platforms of dissemination” like the social media. It also 
mandated that study of the civil code should be incorporated into compulsory
legal classes for leading cadres and that it should be made a more substantial 
component of education on rule of law in elementary, secondary, and higher
education. 
Another more extensive nationwide campaign encompassing students,
the academic community and Party members was launched in mid-July.
This new campaign requires CCP members, school students and academics 
to study the “Four Histories.” The “Four Histories” are: “the history of the
CCP, the history of new China, the history of the reform and opening up, and 
the history of socialist development.” Parents have been told that there will 
be exams when the new semester begins and students will be tested. China’s 
official media described the “Four Histories” as a new political drive and “key
task” to promote the contents in classrooms at colleges and universities. The 
East China Normal University in Shanghai has incorporated the campaign 
material in its seminar series so that students will learn, and also “preach” its 
contents to people outside the campus.
Writing in the China Education Daily (August 13) Lu Yanqin, Deputy 
Secretary of the Party Committee of Zhejiang Jiaxing University, reiterated 
the importance of studying the “Four Histories” and said it will “help young
people understand why the leadership of the Communist Party of China is the
people’s choice and history’s choice”. He said carrying out the “Four Histories”
education among young people and integrating the “Four Histories” education 
into the teaching of ideological and political courses and related professional 
courses, will “help young people have a deep understanding of the hardwon New China’s ‘red regime’ and the hard-won socialism with Chinese 
characteristics”. 
Liu Yanqin also explained the ‘Red Gene’ campaign and its significance.
He cited CCP CC General Secretary Xi Jinping’s recent congratulatory
letter to the Eighth National Congress of the Chinese Young Pioneers when 
he pointed out that it is necessary to “inherit the Red Gene, cultivate new 
– 192 – 
XI JINPING’S EFFORTS TO CONSOLIDATE MARXIST IDEOLOGY AMONG CCP MEMBERS TO COUNTER US 
generations, unite, educate, and lead the young pioneers to be the successors
of the cause of Communism”. He described the “Red Gene” as the “life 
code of the Chinese Communists. It records the path of the Communists’
descent into the past. It contains the nature and purpose of a Marxist Party.
It is embedded with the ideals and beliefs of the Communists to fight for. It 
gathers the great revolutionary spirit of the Communist Party of China—
the original intention and mission of the Communist Party of China”. He 
further said, “To strengthen ideological and political education for young
people, it is necessary to carry on the Red Gene well, and strive to cultivate 
socialist builders and successors who develop comprehensively in the new era 
of morality, intelligence, sports, and art”.
The Red Gene campaign was first started in the People’s Liberation Army
(PLA) in 2018. In June 2018, the Central Military Commission (CMC) 
promulgated the “Outline for the Implementation of Inheriting Red Genes
from Generation to Generation”. Its objective is to develop the Red Culture so 
that the officers and men will always accept the influence of the Red Culture,
so that the Red Gene will remain viable and show its power.
These campaigns are intended to strengthen the commitment of Party
members and cadres to Marxist ideology and ensure they don’t waver as US 
pressure intensifies. Xi Jinping is aware that US intentions include putting
the CCP under enormous pressure and moving him out of office, which 
is why the stress in recent months on the “two defends”, or “protecting” Xi 
Jinping as the “core” of the CCP CC. However, together with the imposition
of increasingly restrictive security controls, the strain on the Chinese people
could be considerable. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on August 
29, 2020.) 
– 193 – 
29. China and the Post COVID-19 World
 
In the midst of the black clouds of the coronavirus, or COVID-19, spreading 
uncertainty around the globe and governments grappling to stop the immense 
loss to human life and damage to their economies, world leaders have begun 
assessing the possible contours of the post COVID-19 world. The US and 
the West particularly are trying to keep their economies strong and retain the 
advantage in advanced technologies to ensure that the global balance of power 
does not change, as that could mean a new China dominated world order 
with potential consequences for forms of government, individual freedoms 
and social values. US-China rivalry is anticipatedly escalating.
US President Trump has declared on record that he will not allow
America to lose its advantage, implying it will strive to retain global primacy.
On April 8, he questioned the role of the World Health Organisation
(WHO) and bluntly observed that it appeared to be acting on China’s
orders and was responsible for delaying the warning to the rest of the world.
There have been doubts about the WHO’s role since it’s Tweet of January
14 denying human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus, though by
that time, China was already reporting such cases and Taiwan subsequently
publicly announced it had informed WHO of this in late December. In a
review of its earlier decision and a blow to China’s hi-tech sector, the UK is 
likely to ban Huawei’s fifth generation (5G) in British telecommunications
networks. Chinese President Xi Jinping too, in early February well before
China made gains in tackling the coronavirus epidemic, instructed the 
Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) apex Politburo Standing Committee
(PBSC) and his officials that China must not allow its economy to slip, must
resume manufacturing and economic activity, try to reestablish global supply
chains and expand its market share. Alluding to China’s global ambitions,
he said it must behave like a “responsible global power”, while Chinese
Foreign Minister Wang Yi spoke of creating a “community of shared future
for mankind”. An interesting coincidence was the disclosure by a Chinese 
 
CHINA AND THE POST COVID-19 WORLD 
government think-tank of its proposal for a Beijing-led rival to the World
Health Organisation!
While the rest of the world is combatting the COVID-19, recent 
Chinese actions signal that Beijing’s ambition to dominate the Indo-Pacific 
region has not changed. On April 3, Chinese Navy warships attacked and 
sank a Vietnamese fishing boat engaged in normal fishing activities near
Fulin Island. China’s People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF), on April 
1, undertook a 36-hour combat oriented exercise near Taiwan. The aircraft 
engaged in tactical acrobatics, reconnaissance, early-warning and surveillance 
work, airborne strikes and other unspecified tasks. The same day, two PLA 
Navy Air Force Xian H-6G maritime strike bombers and one Shaanxi Y-9JB 
(GX-8) electronic warfare and surveillance aircraft flew through international
air space between the Japanese islands of Okinawa and Miyako in the East
China Sea, triggering an immediate response by the fighter jets of the Japan
Air Self-Defence Force ( JASDF). Again, on April 15, the PLAAF conducted 
a long-range military drill when Xian H-6K bombers, a Shaanxi KJ-500 
Airborne Early Warning and Control (AWAC) aircraft, a Shaanxi Y-9JB 
(GX-8) electronic warfare and surveillance plane, as well as Su-30 and J-11 
fighter jets passed through the Bashi Channel, a strategically pivotal waterway
between the Philippines and the Taiwanese island of Orchid connecting the
South China Sea with the western Pacific Ocean. Some flew through the 
Miyako Strait. Earlier in March 2020, an Artillery Brigade of the 76th Group
Army in the Western Theatre Command carried out ‘live fire’ exercises in the 
Tibet Military Region, and a week earlier, the PLA Rocket Force carried out 
high-altitude ‘live fire’ exercises at 4,500 metres in Tibet. These were clearly
intended to convey to Japan, Vietnam, Taiwan and India, as well as the US,
that China retains the capability and intent of becoming the dominant power 
of the Indo-Pacific. 
Perceiving this time as opportune, China launched a worldwide 
diplomatic and media offensive to propagate that its model of government 
had been efficient and successful in controlling the coronavirus epidemic—
implying that it could replace democracies—and that it stood ready to assist
other countries in the spirit of the “community of shared future for mankind”.
Extensive publicity was, accordingly, given to the arrival of Chinese doctors 
– 195 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and medical equipment in Italy. This diplomatic effort, also dubbed ‘mask 
diplomacy’, has, however, been undermined by the publicised admissions of
the deceased Dr Li Wenliang and Dr Ai Fen, Director of the Intensive Care 
Unit (ICU) at Wuhan Central Hospital. Numerous reports, including videos,
that filtered out from inside China also contest the official Chinese figure 
of approximately 3,335 dead due to the coronavirus and estimate the actual 
number at between 46,000 and 48,000! They point to the 5-hour long queues
outside Wuhan’s seven mortuaries, each of which are to receive 300 urns a day
till end April, to collect the ashes of their relatives. China additionally sought 
to aggressively counter reports about the coronavirus ‘escaping’ from one of 
two Biolabs in Wuhan, or that China had delayed providing full information
thereby facilitating spread of the virus. It objected to US President Trump
and US Secretary of State describing it as the “Wuhan virus”, threatened to 
sue reporters using that term, and countered that the virus had, in fact, been 
spread by US servicemen visiting Wuhan in October.The aggressive tone used 
by some of China’s younger diplomats triggered a debate within China, with 
veteran diplomats, including former Vice Foreign Minister Fu Ying, pointing
out that it could be counter-productive. Meanwhile, Chinese officials and 
the official media sought to convey that the medical equipment and supplies
shipped to various countries were ‘donations’. But these claims were stoutly 
rebuffed with the UK, Italy, the Netherlands, France and Spain declaring that 
the supplies were paid for and, furthermore, that they were of poor quality and
unusable. This has tarnished China’s reputation and image. China is widely
viewed as a country intent on benefiting from other people’s miseries. 
Public opinion and popular sentiment are powerful factors that influence 
government policy in democracies. Strong suspicions about China’s role in 
the coronavirus pandemic persist. These have been substantiated by the report 
in the independent Chinese media outlet ‘Caixin Global’, which revealed 
that Chinese laboratories had identified a mystery virus — later identified as 
COVID-19 — to be a highly infectious new pathogen by late December 2019,
but were ordered to stop further testing, destroy samples, and suppress the 
news. Reports additionally revealed that while the first case of a coronavirus 
patient occurred on November 19, the Chinese authorities chose to disclose 
and share the information that there was human-to-human transmission with 
– 196 – 
CHINA AND THE POST COVID-19 WORLD 
the world only towards the end of January. This denied the world community 
a crucial two-months of warning and preparation time, and medical scientists,
researchers and pharmaceutical companies lost a vital two months in the race 
to develop life-saving vaccines.
Popular suspicions about China’s role have been fuelled by reports of the 
research done by Dr Shi Zhengli, a leading scientist of the Key Laboratory
of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, who published her finding that the Severe Acute 
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) virus originated in bats in Science in 2005 
and another on “Bat Coronavirus in China” published in March 2019, and 
reports of similar research by other Chinese scientists. They have been further 
heightened by the publication at regular intervals of books like Unrestricted 
Warfare (February 1999) authored by two serving PLA Colonels; the War for 
Biological Dominance (2010) by Guo Jiwei, Professor and Chief Physician at 
the Third Military Medical University, Army University; an essay in 2015 by
He Fuchu, later Vice President of the PLA Academy of Military Sciences,
which asserts that biotechnology—ranging from biomaterials to “brain 
control” weapons—would become “a new strategic commanding height” in 
national defence; the New Highland of War (2017) authored by Zhang Shibo,
retired General and former President of the PLA National Defense University;
and the inclusion for the first time in the 2017 edition of Science of Military 
Strategy — an authoritative textbook published by the PLA National Defense 
University — of a new section on “biology as a domain of military struggle”,
which includes discussion of “specific ethnic genetic attacks.”
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely damaged world economies with 
international financial organisations anticipating a worldwide recession. The 
repercussions of China’s failure to disclose information in time will be felt 
even after the world has dealt with, and overcome, the coronavirus as it is 
likely to affect human behaviour and social interaction for many months. In 
the post COVID-19 world, many countries will review trade policies. The US 
and many others, for example, are unlikely to ignore a Xinhua commentary
of March 4, 2020, stating that it can send the US to “the hell of the novel 
coronavirus pandemic” by banning the export of medical supplies. It warned 
that it can announce “the strategic control of medical products and a ban on 
– 197 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
exports to the US”which imports most of the masks from China. It added that 
most of the drugs in the US are imported with production bases of almost 90 
per cent in China.There will be an effort, certainly by the major powers which 
must include India, to eliminate dependence on a single source of supply in 
areas critical or vital to the nation. The developed Western countries, with 
active encouragement from the US, will probably seek alternate sources of 
supplies and set up alternate global supply chains.The US and the West remain 
the world’s most developed and wealthy regions, which give them a degree of 
resilience and will cushion the economic fallout. Nevertheless, till they are able 
to revive their economies and create jobs for their populations, global trade
will be low. China’s effort to position itself as a world power rivalling the US
will continue to be, possibly more aggressively, resisted.
China’s own prospects for an early economic recovery presently do not 
appear promising. Chinese economists are debating whether China should
at all mention a growth target, with Ma Jun, an academic member of the 
People’s Bank of China’s monetary policy committee, recommending it be
dropped “because growth will largely depend on how the pandemic develops
in Europe and the United States” , and Yu Yongding, a former Central Bank 
adviser, urging the government to mention a numerical goal for expansion in
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), even if it is low. Separately, Xu Xiaonian,
a Professor of Economics and Finance at the China Europe International 
Business School, said that till the pandemic in Europe and America gets over,
Chinese export companies will have no orders, workers will have no wages
and there will be no consumption, and a recession is inevitable. He said,
“We are not only short of food and oil, but we are also short of markets;
we are short of orders. Our per capita GDP is one-fifth that of the United 
States and one-fourth that of Europe. The domestic purchasing power cannot 
support our enormous manufacturing capacity.” He added, “We still lack raw 
materials, especially the technology-intensive basic raw materials, which must 
be imported from South Korea, Japan and Germany. We lack technology, and 
technology cannot be developed rapidly when we close the door.” In addition 
to the projected drop in China’s growth rate, the unemployment rate could 
exceed 10 per cent, half of the small and medium enterprises have closed, and 
manufacturing and economic activity have been slow to resume. The Beijing­
– 198 – 
CHINA AND THE POST COVID-19 WORLD 
led alternative to the World Health Organisation (WHO) will be opposed.
Note will have been taken too of the UN awarding a contract to the Chinese
telecom company Huawei for its 70th anniversary celebrations, which will be 
seen as an instance of China’s growing influence in international organisation.
The resentments that are building up against China will be an important factor 
that China will have to contend with. China’s decision to reject Estonia’s
request for a discussion on the coronavirus in the United Nations Security
Council (UNSC) has served only to heighten suspicions. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on April 
9, 2020.) 
– 199 – 
30. The US-China Trade War: A Strategic Move
 
Major changes in the international geopolitical landscape, anticipated since the
global economic downturn in 2008, are now beginning to occur. The Sino-US
relationship, one of the world’s most important in the past nearly four decades, is
undergoing fundamental change, with US President Donald Trump translating
into action the apprehensions of the US establishment about China’s rise and 
potential challenge to US primacy. He is the first US President since Nixon to
begin altering the nature of the US’ relations with China.
By initiating the so-called ‘trade war’ with China this April, Trump has 
effectively put China on notice. Chinese analysts and strategic experts have 
been quick to assess—quite correctly—that the trade war is actually a bid 
to ‘contain’ China’s rise. Many Chinese analysts have harboured suspicions 
about Trump’s true attitude towards China ever since his precedent-breaking 
telephone conversation with Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen in December 
2017. Shi Yinhong, Professor of International Relations at Renmin University 
in Beijing, at that time promptly asserted, “The US President-elect hates 
China and will encourage Tsai to resist pressure from the mainland.”
On September 17, 2018, President Trump announced that the would 
impose tariffs on an additional $ 200 billion of imports from China. The 
new round of tariffs took effect from September 24 at a 10 per cent rate. The 
rate jumps to 25 per cent on January 1, 2019. The announcement surprised 
observers who had thought Trump would wait till Chinese Vice Minister 
of Commerce Wang Shouwen and the US Treasury Department’s Under 
Secretary for International Affairs, David Malpass concluded negotiations in 
Washington. Chinese Vice Premier Liu He had also been invited for talks 
which were scheduled for September 27 or 28. Punitive tariffs contemplated 
by US President Trump so far total nearly $ 500 billion.
This so-called ‘trade war’ between the US and China initiated by US 
President Donald Trump coincides with the perceptible slowing down of 
China’s economy—the Shanghai market is down roughly 23 per cent in 
THE US-CHINA TRADE WAR: A STRATEGIC MOVE 
dollar terms so far this year—and puts Chinese President Xi Jinping under
increasing pressure as it shows no signs of easing since it began in April 2018.
There are, additionally, indications of inflation, but despite that Beijing has
been printing money thereby possibly aggravating the problem. In the first 
two weeks of September, the People’s Bank of China injected approximately
Renminbi (RMB) 90 billion into the economy. The slowing down of China’s 
economy would be particularly troubling for the CCP leadership as it could 
trigger an eruption of demonstrations and protests by a disgruntled populace
and spell difficult times ahead for Xi Jinping.
Adding to this pressure is the definitive pushback on Xi Jinping’s signature
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) by a growing number of countries. Germany,
France, Britain, the European Union, Australia, Japan and Canada have also
intervened to stop Chinese companies from purchasing technology and hi-tech
companies. On August 1, the US Congress increased pressure on China, and
the US Senate passed a defence policy bill to make national-security reviews of
Chinese deals in the US, by the interagency Committee on Foreign Investment,
more stringent. Export controls governing which US technologies can be sent
abroad have been revamped.One provision of the bill requires an annual report on
China to include information on efforts by the Chinese government to influence
US media and cultural institutions.China’s official news agency Xinhua and stateowned television China Global Television Network (CGTN) have been asked to 
register themselves as ‘foreign agents’.The bill additionally limits Chinese funding
of language programmes at US universities, restricts Chinese involvement in joint
military exercises and calls for bolstering US ties with India and Taiwan.
Chinese intellectuals and academics, including from the Chinese 
Communist Party’s (CCP’s) prestigious Central Party School in Beijing,
have, since last year, been warning that China should tone down its aggressive 
rhetoric and not have an exaggerated sense of its economic or military strength.
In September 2017, Luo Jianbo, Head of the China Foreign Policy Centre at 
the Central Party School, cautioned against overestimating China’s strength
and said the people need to guard against “arrogance” and “conceit”. He made 
particular mention in this context of the nationalist fervour generated by the 
Belt and Road Initiative and the BRI Forum in April 2017, and recommended 
that Beijing revise its assertive foreign policy and avoid the risk of over-reach. 
– 201 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Earlier, after the US announced tariffs on an additional $16 billion worth 
of Chinese goods in late August, China’s Ministry of Commerce announced 
that China has filed a complaint with the World Trade Organisation
(WTO) against the US levies. Bai Ming, Deputy Director of the Ministry
of Commerce’s International Market Research Institute said, “Launching
the complaint against the US at the WTO can help China gain legitimacy
for its retaliation and win sympathy from other countries.” Trump’s recent 
announcement that the US could quit the WTO, however, has the potential
to deprive China of a possible neutral interlocutor in the dispute.The Chinese 
government on September 18, announced it would impose tariffs on US goods 
worth $60 billion following the Trump Administration’s announcement that 
it was hitting $200 billion worth of Chinese goods with new tariffs. It said 
China’s new tariffs will be levied at rates of 5 per cent or 10 per cent,depending
on the product and affect more than 5,000 US goods including meat, nuts,
alcoholic drinks, chemicals, clothes, machinery, furniture and auto parts.
China’s reaction to the US actions was initially unusually temperate, but
became sharper later. Since the US first decided to impose tariffs on US$
34 billion worth of Chinese exports on July 6, the CCP’s official newspaper
the People’s Daily published seven commentaries on the ‘trade war’. In
keeping with the CCP Central Committee (CC) directive of early June,
none of these was belligerent and sought instead to portray China as the 
‘wronged’ party. The first commentary cautioned the US that “bullying, rude
and unreasonable acts” will have “disastrous consequences that harm the
interests of Chinese and American companies and people, seriously threaten
global free trade and the multilateral system, and impede the advancement
of the world economy’s recovery”. The second said, “Some people openly
ignore the overwhelmingly obvious truth that a trade war is a double-edged
sword.” Another commentary argued that “America’s ‘zero-sum theory of
trade,’ violation of rules, and going against trends not only attacks ChinaUS trade cooperation but also brings great uncertainty to the entire world
economy.” It said, “The history of international trade has repeatedly proven
unilateral protectionism is a zero-sum game and whoever plays it will have
bad luck”. The fourth asserted that the only aim of America’s talk about
“so-called ‘fair trade’ is to have every country of the world pay the bill for 
– 202 – 
THE US-CHINA TRADE WAR: A STRATEGIC MOVE 
US global hegemony”. The fifth commentary warned of the “danger of
making the normal world trade structure slip into the ‘Cold War trap’ of
trade protectionism and unilateralism”.The sixth commentary was published
after Trump threatened on July 10, to impose tariffs on an additional $200
billion worth of Chinese exports. It vowed to work with the international
community to “jointly defend the rules of free trade and the multilateral trade
system and fight back against US trade bullying”. The final commentary said
that US actions had hurt the world economy, the American people, and
China’s poor. It stressed that “the US does not have the right to make a
‘recessionary trap’ for the world.”
By August, though, the Chinese official media had begun to escalate 
the level of rhetoric. On August 6, 2018, the People’s Daily Foreign Edition
launched an attack against US President Trump’s trade policy using the Wang
Hailou column, an important column directed at members of the Chinese 
diaspora. Written by a senior editor for the newspaper, Hu Jihong, the article 
criticised the logic of Trump’s foreign policy. Hu Jihong summarised it as 
based on the belief that “the US has taken on too many responsibilities and
all countries across the world are taking advantage of the US.” He explained
that Trump has chosen the most “simple and crude” way to revitalise the US 
economy and had bypassed the WTO. Stating that Trump’s aim is to “force 
China to make major concessions at the negotiating table,” Hu Jihong said,“If 
Mr. Trump is familiar with modern and contemporary Chinese history, then 
he cannot be unaware that in matters of national interest and national dignity,
China will absolutely not accept blackmail. It will stand upright and respond.”
He described Trump’s effort as “wishful thinking.
Separately, the official Global Times said, after Trump threatened an 
additional $ 267 billion in tariffs, “We are looking forward to a more 
beautiful counter-attack and will keep increasing the pain felt by the US”.
Beijing’s Ministry of Commerce on August 18, warned of “synchronized 
countermeasures.” A day earlier, the US White House cautioned, “If China 
takes retaliatory action against our farmers or other industries, we will 
immediately pursue phase three, which is tariffs on approximately $267 billion
of additional imports.” US President Trump had said days earlier that the $ 
267 billion of tariffs is ready to be announced. 
– 203 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Consensus in China has simultaneously coalesced around the view that 
the trade war camouflages the real US agenda of severely retarding China’s rise.
There are indications that China’s leadership is preparing to contend with an
altered, more competitive if not confrontational, relationship with the US.The 
latest issue of Qiushi (Seeking Truth), the CCP CC authoritative theoretical 
journal, carried a lengthy commentary defending China’s economic system 
and asserted that America’s real goal in launching the trade war is to thwart 
China’s rise. In another commentary in the People’s Daily on August 26,Long
Guoqiang, Vice President of the PRC State Council’s in-house think-tank,
Development Research Centre, said that he expects “deep structural change”
in the relationship between the US and China after the trade war, with the US 
treating China as a key rival. He added, “The trade war is not just a measure 
for the US to gain more economic benefits, it is also an important strategy
to contain China.” He advocated that China should not engage in angry
rhetoric, but should continue to match the US action for action while being 
ready to resume negotiations any time. Long Guoqiang recommended that 
in the short-term, the government should offer assistance to companies hit
by the tariffs and help find new markets for exporters and substitute sources 
for imports. He said China should not make the same mistakes as the Soviet 
Union and must not abandon the domestic agenda.
Important is the article written in April 2018 by Yuan Peng, Vice 
President of the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations
(CICIR), which stated that a fundamental structural change in the Sino-US 
relationship is taking place. The CICIR, incidentally, is the think-tank of 
China’s Ministry of State Security which is responsible for foreign intelligence.
Yuan Peng described the ongoing trade war as the first serious clash between 
China and the US. He noted that unlike on previous occasions, this time 
the political, commercial, academic and military sectors—in other words, the 
entire American society—are involved, with the US government taking the
lead. Again, unlike in the past, this time there is no voice supporting China.
He attributed this to the view in the US today that China is a competitor in all 
respects and that China and the US are competing not only in the Asia-Pacific 
region but also globally. He pinpointed the launch of “One Belt and One 
Road” and the Djibouti Safeguard Base project as the triggers that convinced 
– 204 – 
THE US-CHINA TRADE WAR: A STRATEGIC MOVE 
the US that China is a global opponent. Observing that today the US and
China have no common enemies like the Soviet Union or Osama bin Laden, 
Yuan Peng cautioned that the Sino-US bilateral relationship will be impacted 
by third parties and be constrained by the issues in North Korea, Japan, India,
Ukraine, and Iran. Conflicts between China and US and these countries, he 
assessed, will, without exception, ultimately become conflicts between China 
and the US. 
Crucial to the trade war is the ‘Made in China-2025’ programme 
representing the CCP leadership’s declared effort to make China a hitechnology power, at par with the world’s most advanced nations by 2025.
The technology sector is critical to China’s emergence as a major world power.
The prohibition on the fast-growing Chinese telecom company ZTE, which 
has substantive investments from China’s defence State-owned Enterprises 
(SoEs) and is closely tied to China’s security apparatus, from doing business
in the US, was a clear indication that China’s technology sector would be 
targeted. The ban and punitive fines crippled ZTE, which is dependent on 
purchase of micro-chips and semi-conductors from the US, and brought home
to Chinese leaders their vulnerabilities, especially dependence on foreign semiconductors. Dong Yunting, Director of the Expert Committee at the China 
Information Technology Industry Federation, reacted quickly saying that the
semi-conductor industry cannot be restricted to national boundaries. Arguing 
that “there are hundreds of semi-conductor components, and … no country 
can do them all”, he recommended that the “industry must be globalized.”The 
US action has brought home to Beijing that other countries too can use trade 
and exports as weapons!
This was soon followed by the US decision in August to levy punitive 
tariffs on 44 Chinese military companies and entities, which will hit China’s
ambitions hard because these conglomerates are the leaders in development
of new military products. In fact, 4,038 patents were declassified to aid 
military-civilian integration as soon as the trade war started in April. Among
the military entities are eight companies and dozens of their subsidiaries,
including the China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation Second 
Academy (a research unit of the largest missile systems developer in China);
the communications system manufacturer Hebei Far East Communication 
– 205 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
System Engineering; the state-owned China Electronics Technology Group
Corporation (CETC) which develops semi-conductors, radar technology
and micro-electronic devices; China Volant Industry, which exports and 
imports aerospace technologies; and China Hi-Tech Industry Import 
and Export Corporation. The ‘entity list’ clarifies that it “identifies entities 
reasonably believed to be involved, or to pose a significant risk of being or
becoming involved, in activities contrary to the national security or foreign
policy interests of the United States.”There was an immediate reaction in the 
markets with share prices for businesses related to those on the export control 
list plummeting downwards. GCI Science & Technology, the parent company
of Hebei Far East Communications and Glarun Technology, a subsidiary of
CETC, dropped over 7 per cent on the Shenzhen exchange and 6 per cent on
the Shanghai markets respectively.
On September 20, the US sanctioned Russia’s Rosoboron export and 
the Chinese military’s Equipment Development Department. Though US
officials clarified that Russia was the target, it would not have been lost on the 
Chinese, who are dependent on Russia for military technology and hardware,
that they are dangerously close to US ‘red lines’. China’s response was swift. It 
recalled People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) Commander Vice Admiral 
Shen Jinlong who was visiting the US, deferred a meeting on joint staff
communications scheduled for September and gave a demarche to the US 
Ambassador. 
Meanwhile, US Administration officials are expressing confidence that
they have the stronger hand because the US economy is picking up while
China’s is slowing down and China is more dependent on trade than the US.
The trade war between the US and China is unlikely to ease any time soon
unless Beijing, in what would be a very surprising move, decides to capitulate.
Such a decision will greatly diminish Xi Jinping’s personal standing. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 24, 2018.) 
– 206 – 
31. The US-China Trade War: Fall-Out in China
 
The mood in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) hierarchy is sombre. 
The US-China trade war, as it is called, marks a substantive change in the
US-China relationship. Mutual suspicion now taints what Beijing has for decades
described as its most important relationship. The bipartisan support that Trump’s 
new policy towards China enjoys points to strains in the relationship lasting for
quite some time and, in any case, fundamentally altering it.
Throughout his election campaign Trump consistently highlighted 
terrorism and China as two issues that he would attack. Even prior to Trump,
there was recognition in the US strategic establishment that China’s rise did 
not portend well for the US, but US President George Bush got distracted by
the war in Afghanistan and Obama was unable to fashion a strategy. Trump 
is the first US President after Nixon—i.e. after 30 years—to begin to reshape 
US strategy and policy towards China.
Chinese Party cadres assess that the trigger for the US initiating the trade
war was Chinese President Xi Jinping’s decision to abolish fixed tenures for 
top Party positions and the ambitious goal posts enunciated by him at the 19th
Party Congress in October 2017. These are the ‘China Dream’, the target date
for achieving which was set to coincide with the centenary of the founding of
the CCP in 2021; ‘Made in China-2025’ designed to propel China into the 
ranks of the world’s most advanced hi-tech nations; and the declared ambition 
to make China a “major world power with pioneering global influence” by 2049,
the 100th year of the founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). If at
all a warning was required that China intends to surpass US power, this was it! 
The US was precise in its targeting to prevent China’s rise and singled 
out ‘Made in China-2025’ as well as its adjunct agenda of ‘Civil-Military 
Integration’, seen as the militarising of technology. The US picked on China’s
rapidly rising Shenzhen-based telecommunications company ZTE in April 
2018. US sanctions on ZTE, including the conditions imposed following 
a reprieve granted on the personal intervention of Chinese President Xi 
Jinping, have virtually destroyed it. Next was China’s fastest expanding hi­
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
tech telecommunications company Huawei. Like ZTE, this too has clear 
ongoing links to China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA). The US charged
Meng Wanzhou, Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of Huawei and daughter of
Huawei’s founder Ren Zhengfei, with illegally selling prohibited components
to Iran in violation of US sanctions. The US has approached the Canadian 
courts to extradite Meng Wanzhou, under detention in Canada since 
December 2018, to the US. Meanwhile, the US imposed sanctions against
six Chinese technical entities of which four are headquartered in Hong Kong.
The latter move implies that Hong Kong might no longer benefit from the 
more relaxed application of trade restrictions by the US government.There are 
currently 68 Chinese companies on the banned list in the US. In addition, 144 
Chinese companies linked to the Chinese military are also on the banned list.
The sanctions have hit China hard. The Chinese leadership was severely
jolted by their impact on China’s hi-tech sector, which had been claiming to
be self-reliant and a world leader. According to indications the leaderships of
ZTE and Huawei were also surprised at the dependence of their companies
on a few foreign companies—primarily four US companies—for vital hi-tech 
components crucial for their products. Huawei’s Ren Zhengfei, a former PLA 
engineer, after initially asserting that Huawei will not be impacted, recently
admitted that Huawei would take a long time to develop key components like
laser imaging chips, etc., required to stay in the business. 
With trade talks making no progress and purchase of US-made hi-tech 
components and parts banned, Chinese companies are in dire financial trouble 
as their production capacities have been severely hit. Shares have fallen sharply.
Huawei’s mobile phone handsets which are their major consumer product, for 
example, have lost 48 per cent market share, severely impacting the company’s 
revenues. After brave initial comments that Huawei can weather this 
temporary storm, Huawei founder and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Ren
Zhengfei recently conceded that Huawei is in serious trouble. In addition,
Trump is applying further pressure and urging countries and US allies not to 
purchase Huawei’s 5G on grounds of national security. There is no indication 
yet that the US will ease the pressure on China and the latest round of trade 
talks that began in Shanghai on July 30, ended with US President Trump 
tweeting another 10 per cent hike on tariffs. 
– 208 – 
 
THE US-CHINA TRADE WAR: FALL-OUT IN CHINA 
These new tariffs are in addition to those already imposed by the US on 
$250 billion in imports from China. Beijing, which retaliated with tariffs on 
$110 billion in US products, has only about $10 billion in US goods left to 
hit in response against the threatened US tariffs on $300 billion in Chinese 
products. The latest new tariffs of 10 per cent starting September 1 on an
additional $300 billion a year of Chinese imports sent a shock wave through
Chinese tech stocks on August 2. In Hong Kong, Tencent slumped by 2.6 
per cent that day, while Meituan Dianping was down 3.6 per cent. Struggling 
smartphone maker Xiaomi went down 1.7 per cent. Similarly, on Wall Street,
shares of Alibaba and JD.com both fell more than 4 per cent, while search 
giant Baidu finished down 2.2 per cent.
China’s initial reaction to the US actions was to try and “buy off ”Trump.
After the US hit China with 25 per cent tariffs on $50 billions of exports in 
July and August 2018 and added 10 per cent tariffs on another $200 billion 
in September 2018, and with Trump threatening later that year to boost 
that tariff to 25 per cent, China began serious negotiations with US Trade 
Representative Lighthizer and other US officials. China simultaneously
activated pro-China lobbies and individuals to propagate that China would 
not be affected but that the US itself would be hurt by this action. The CCP 
began drumming up nationalism and xenophobia. China’s official media 
gradually shifted to portraying the US as unfair and a bully, and asserting that 
China can withstand US pressure.The official Party mouthpiece People’s Daily, 
for instance, published 13 commentaries in May and June, accusing the US of
hegemonistic behaviour. An example of the effectiveness of China’s campaign 
are the numerous articles in the US and international media detailing how
American consumers and businesses will suffer because of the trade war, how 
it will adversely impact international trade, and how China is dominant in 
global supply chains which will get disrupted. An example is the ‘open letter’
to the US President addressed by the US foreign affairs and China scholar 
community. Beijing played on these apprehensions, adding that it is reviewing
its policy on the export of rare earths. But the US has stayed firmly on course.
The draft amendments it gave Chinese Vice Premier Liu He to carry back
to Beijing in mid-May were not accepted by the CCP Central Committee 
(CC) Politburo which felt they impacted China’s sovereignty. The meeting 
– 209 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
failed. Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying declared:
“The Chinese side will not give in to any extreme pressure, intimidation or 
blackmail and we will never concede an inch on major issues of principle.”
But the suspicion that is beginning to run deep in China and the US
is exhibiting itself in other areas. US business travellers in China are being
harassed and questioned. By late July, companies issued advisories to US 
citizens to postpone avoidable trips to China. Canadians are specially being
singled out for harassment and two, of whom one is a serving diplomat, have 
been arrested and sentenced to death. While this is connected to the detention 
of Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou, the threat to them is serious. In the US there 
are increasing reports of Chinese students being questioned on arrival and 
often deported.The services of Chinese scientists and researchers including in
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) have been terminated. The Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has begun investigating espionage cases in all 
its field offices in 51 states of the US with each linking back to Beijing.
The US-China trade war has come at an inopportune time for Xi Jinping.
It coincides with the slowing down of China’s economy and the spreading
discontent among students, workers and ex-PLA personnel. The instances of
criticism of Xi Jinping’s policies by prominent academics, members of the Party’s 
top advisory body the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPP 
CC), ‘princelings’ and former senior officials, including at least two Commerce 
Ministers, have been increasing. Reports suggest some prominent academics
approached veteran retired leaders to pressure Xi Jinping to amend his policies
or quit. Academics who, at a meeting in Beijing, expressed the view that China
should modify its policies and not antagonise the US were ‘disciplined’. Party 
cadres have been critical of Xi Jinping’s policies saying that he has “over-reached”
himself. Others have questioned the hyper-nationalism that surrounded the
first Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) Forum and advised lowering of rhetoric.
That was visibly toned down at the second BRI Forum in Beijing this April. In
private conversations, many senior Chinese cadres express the sentiment that
“China is alone” and “everyone is against us”. Other countries are also beginning
to reassess China’s economic might and realise that China is not invincible.
In the face of growing pressure, the CCP CC has decided on a tough stance.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has begun preparing the Party and the people for 
– 210 – 
THE US-CHINA TRADE WAR: FALL-OUT IN CHINA 
difficult times ahead. Visiting Jiangxi in late June, he asked the assembled cadres
to prepare for the “second Long March”. Five hundred journalists were tasked to
write eulogies of the Long March. China’s official media reflected this decision. A 
People’s Daily commentary said it was “laughable”to say the Chinese economy was
being adversely impacted by the US tariffs, adding,“These irrefutable facts are not
negated by anyone raising a hubbub.” The CCP’s leading theoretical fortnightly
journal Qiu Shi asserted, “China will not be afraid of any threats or pressure the
United States is making that may escalate economic and trade frictions. China has
no choice, nor escape route, and will just have to fight it out till the end. No one,
no force should underestimate and belittle the steel will of the Chinese people and
its strength and tenacity to fight a war.”
The trouble that erupted in Hong Kong on June 9 and shows no signs of
abating, is an additional serious complication for Xi Jinping. The protestors 
are becoming progressively more articulate and have escalated their demands 
to scrapping of the Extradition Bill and resignation of the Beijing-appointed
Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam. Beijing has chosen not to interfere
yet, but that it will at a time of its choice is certain. Meanwhile, an interesting
divergence in tenor of the officially owned Chinese news outlets is visible. It 
suggests differences within the top leadership and the factions in the CCP.
This could be an indicator of the vulnerability of Xi Jinping’s position.
Xi Jinping’s personal background shows his unwavering commitment 
to the CCP and realising the ambition of his forbears to see China as a 
major global power. His instinct will be to resist pressure and push ahead
with achieving the goals set at the 19th Party Congress. Whether this will 
mean China becoming more aggressive in its foreign policy, with possible
military encounters with neighbours like Taiwan, Vietnam, Japan and India, is 
uncertain. China’s recent posture indicates that its People’s Liberation Army
(PLA) is confident of deterring the US from intervening on behalf of its allies
in the region.The annual informal meetings at Beidaihe over the next few days
could yield clues about whether Xi Jinping will come under fire from senior 
veterans who will also be attending the informal conclave. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on August 
8, 2019.) 
– 211 – 
 
 
32. China’s View of Ties with the US: 
Hints of Concessions? 
High anxiety is apparent in the upper echelons of the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP) leadership in Beijing at the present state of China-US relations.
There is concern that the escalating China-US tensions could further 
deteriorate relations, leading to conflict. Tension in the relationship has been 
sharply accentuated by the coronavirus pandemic and consequent worldwide 
rise in anti-China sentiment.This is explicit in the comments on May 5, of Shi 
Yinhong, an International Relations Professor at China’s Renmin University 
and an adviser to China’s State Council—China’s version of a Cabinet. He 
said, “The United States and China are actually in the era of a new Cold War.
Different from the Cold War between the US and the Soviet Union, the new 
Cold War between the US and China features full competition and a rapid 
decoupling. The US-China relationship is no longer the same as that of a few 
years ago, not even the same as that of a few months ago.”
A sampling of a few comments made in April/May by informed Chinese 
and the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) authoritative official mouthpiece 
People’s Daily give an idea of how Beijing presently views China-US relations.
Zhou Xiaoming, former Deputy Head of China’s mission in Geneva, wrote 
that the West’s efforts to blame China for the global outbreak is “a carefully
coordinated PR campaign initiated by the American government to contain 
China. It is a new battle ground carved out by the US in its war to contain 
China’s rise. We must not underestimate it.” The CCP’s official mouthpiece 
People’s Daily wrote, “Facing the epidemic, cooperation is the only correct 
choice for China and the US. This mentality is unhealthy, unethical and 
lunatic,” adding that China has been transparent all along and has been aiding 
others including the Americans. It said that China has been restrained at the 
smear campaign of the US, but “on the major issues related to our principles 
we dare to draw the sword, and we will never concede.” Hu Xijin, Editorin-Chief of the Global Times wrote on his public Weibo account: “Honestly, 
 
CHINA’S VIEW OF TIES WITH THE US: HINTS OF CONCESSIONS? 
America today won’t back off before crippling China. Many people keep 
saying the situation today is a result of China’s actions. They argue that China
should show some goodwill to the US, and make major concessions, so to win 
back the Americans’ trust so that relations can get back to normal. But I have 
to say … they are too naïve … the biggest drive behind the US shift in attitude 
toward China is the change of power balance between the two countries. The 
US won’t accept the possibility that China may become an equal power.That’s 
the most fundamental.” 
In April alone, at least two major Chinese government think-tanks and 
one ostensibly private, but well connected to the Party hierarchy, issued reports 
examining different aspects of China-US relations and recommending ways
to arrest the slide in the relationship. It is clear that the US continues to be 
recognised as crucial to China’s rise and the revival of its economy.Interestingly,
none recommended yielding concessions to the US, but neither did any of
them suggest actions that would provoke the US. Instead, they recommended 
ways of blunting US propaganda attacks on China and tapping pro-China 
lobbies in the US and other countries to turn the tide in the relationship and
the anti-China sentiment. Two other prominent Chinese who voiced their 
views in the Hong Kong media similarly sought to play down tensions, raising
doubts as to whether they represent the views of Chinese President Xi Jinping
or another faction in the leadership. 
On May 4, Reuters reported that the China Institutes of Contemporary
International Relations (CICIR), a think-tank affiliated with the Ministry of
State Security (MoSS), presented an ‘internal’ report to President Xi Jinping
and top Chinese leaders in early April. The report warned that Beijing faces a 
rising wave of hostility in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak that could tip 
relations with the United States into confrontation. It concluded that global
anti-China sentiment is at its highest since the 1989 Tiananmen Square 
crackdown and could fuel resistance to China’s Belt and Road infrastructure 
investment projects. Washington could also step up financial and military 
support for regional allies, making the security situation in Asia more volatile.
The report said Beijing consequently faces a wave of anti-China sentiment 
led by the United States in the aftermath of the pandemic and needs to be 
prepared for a worst-case scenario of armed confrontation between the two 
– 213 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
global powers. The paper stated that Washington views China’s rise as an 
economic and national security threat and a challenge to Western democracies.
The United States, it added, was aiming to undercut the Chinese Communist 
Party by undermining public confidence.
Separately, an article in the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Daily on 
May 5, 2020, alluding to the major powers utilising the difficult global
economic situation for gaining overall strategic advantage, cautioned they
could use the economic crisis to cause a recession in China and provoke social 
unrest. Advocating that financial and military preparedness would have to 
be commensurate, it warned that an economic crisis could, in turn, cause a 
political crisis.
China’s biggest government think-tank, the Chinese Academy of Social 
Sciences (CASS), on April 24, 2020, published a lengthy 3,152-character 
report in its China Social Science Journal analysing US media attacks against
China during the Covid-19 pandemic. Published only in Chinese, the report 
said this had made it difficult for China to cooperate with other countries and 
fight the pandemic globally. It identified six main characteristics of US media 
attacks “slandering and denigrating China” and said China not only needed to 
clamp down on this propaganda, but prepare itself for future propaganda wars
during major emergencies. The CASS report recommended six basic focus 
areas for winning “public opinion battles” in other countries. These are: (i) 
Prepare for “attacks” from the US and other media by understanding how
foreign media works. (ii) Establish a coordination mechanism for 24-hour 
monitoring and responding to US media and foreign public opinion. Involve 
government media, private media, diplomats, enterprises and think-tanks to 
coordinate quick and effective counter-attacks. (iii) Use supervision of public
opinion to increase trust and reduce doubt.(“Don’t cover up,scapegoat,or show 
partiality in proven shortcomings. some deficiencies in the process of foreign
aid and epidemic prevention should be reported to government developments
for improvement”.) (iv) Diversify external communications. Strengthen nonmainstream media, support WeChat, Weibo and Tiktok to counterbalance 
Twitter, FB and YouTube. Mobilise companies, think tanks, foreign scholars
and experts who are “China-friendly” to speak and write articles on foreign
platforms. (v) Improve empathic communication to create an image of 
– 214 – 
CHINA’S VIEW OF TIES WITH THE US: HINTS OF CONCESSIONS? 
objective, fair media. Use statistics e.g. Pew survey showing 65 per cent of
Americans think Trump’s coronavirus response is slow.“Use foreign audiences’
favourite expressions and narrative forms to affect them,” especially on social 
media. (vi) Strengthen and train human talent for foreign communications.
Hire and train people to write op-eds in foreign languages. Hire or “borrow”
think-tank experts and foreign journalists for China’s use, e.g. to edit Chinese 
state media abroad and help it reach native standards.
The third think-tank is the ‘private’ Beijing-based ‘Minzhi International 
Research Institute’ headed by Prof. Zhang Weiwei, a former Chinese Foreign
Ministry official who has successively worked as a translator for Li Peng,
Wan Li , and Deng Xiaoping. He is best known as an advocate of the ‘China 
Model’. It published an article on US-China relations on April 24 authored 
by Meng Weizhan, Assistant Researcher at the China Research Institute at 
Fudan University. Asserting that “there is no doubt that we can achieve a great 
renaissance and may even surpass the United States”, the article highlighted
that US-China relations are at a “dangerous” juncture and claimed that “senior 
Chinese officials are also very clear-headed that they must improve Sino-US 
relations”. The article discussed ways of reducing the anti-China influence in
the US. 
Some of its main points are: (i) “today’s China-US relations are rather 
dangerous”; (ii) “it is an indisputable fact that no country, including the United 
States, can stop the development of China today”; (iii) “there is no doubt that we
can achieve a great renaissance and may even surpass the United States.However,
there is a problem of faster and slower development, and there is a problem of
higher and lower living standards of the people”; (iii) “in the view of Americans,
in the whole non-Western world, China is most likely to be transformed into a
Christian country”; (iv) it is necessary to ‘win over’ America’s leftists to improve
Sino-US relations; (v) “in another 20 years, we will have no dependence on the
United States. But today, we are dependent on the United States. Many people
may not understand how serious the consequences will be for China once the
United States immediately makes up its mind to “decouple” from China; (vi) “if
we want to improve Sino-US relations, we are unlikely to rely on the American
rightists. The rightists are mostly strategists, militarists and realists. Most of the
leftists are propagandists, thinkers, liberals and literati.Today, the gap of interests 
– 215 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
between China and the United States is too large, there is no overlap, there are
no common strategic interests. If we want to improve relations between the two
countries through the American right, it means that we must make concessions
on the political system and economic model. This will cost us dearly, discount
the interests of the country and put the nation in jeopardy. This is impossible
for us to accept. However, it is possible to improve relations between the two
countries through the American left; (vii) Now some people in the United States
are warning, “China must be contained immediately, or it will be too late!” (viii)
senior Chinese officials are very clear-headed that they must improve SinoUS relations. “There is no reason to damage Sino-US relations”; (ix) “Sino-US
relations are an overall project, and the essence of bilateral relations does not
lie simply in foreign policy. The establishment of an exquisite ideological and
strategic system plays a more critical role in safeguarding national interests”; (x)
regardless of who becomes the US President, the important thing is to ensure
that there is a relatively strong force of “China expertise” in the United States.
We can win over the leftists, who do less harm to our national interests; (ix)
we must improve our ideological strategy and deal with our opponents more
flexibly and cleverly in order to safeguard our own fundamental political system
and fundamental economic interests; (ix) unnecessarily magnifying the panic of
Americans about China, will lead to further difficulties for China’s development
and rise and “is very likely to harm our own fundamental interests.” 
Curious was the interview given by retired PLA Maj Gen Qiao Liang, a
known ‘hawk’ and co-author of the best seller Unrestricted Warfare, to Hong
Kong’s Zijing Magazine of the Bahunia Group around this same time. His
comments suggested there should be no deadline for achieving Taiwan’s 
reunification with the Mainland, or the ‘China Dream’, and appeared intended
to lower temperatures. It is not known whether his comments were authorised
and, if so, by whom. Expressing concern at the growing nationalist sentiment in
China urging military action for the forcible reunification of Taiwan with the
Mainland, he said in a social media post (May 4) that “nationalism appeared to
be driving some proposals being raised in China, and that they would harm the
country”. He cautioned that while an attempt by the PLA to take Taiwan by
force may not prompt Washington to declare war, the US could join forces with
allies in the region to use their sea and air advantages to cut off Beijing’s maritime 
– 216 – 
 
CHINA’S VIEW OF TIES WITH THE US: HINTS OF CONCESSIONS? 
lifeline in the South China Sea. Other Western countries may also be convinced
to impose sanctions on Beijing that would curb China’s economic development.
He warned that in the event of a war over Taiwan, capital will flood out of China
forcing many companies to close down and said, “This would just be a huge
price to pay and it would jeopardise China’s goal of national rejuvenation.” He
advised Beijing to clarify that its top priority was not to take Taiwan back but
achieve its long-term goal of “national rejuvenation”. He explained,“The Taiwan
issue is actually a key problem between China and the US, even though we have
insisted it is China’s domestic issue. In other words, the Taiwan issue cannot 
be completely resolved unless the rivalry between Beijing and Washington is
resolved.” Qiao Liang noted in conclusion that the Chinese economy was “still
heavily reliant on the US dollar”.
Similarly curious is the article, also published in the Hong Kong media 
around this time, by Wu Shicun, President of China’s state-backed National 
Institute for South China Sea Studies and Chairman of the Board of Directors 
of the China-Southeast Asia Research Centre on the South China Sea. Not 
widely known is that Wu Shicun has been a member of the CCP since 1983 
and presently heads the Hainan Provincial Overseas Chinese Affairs Office 
and the Hainan Provincial People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign
Countries (PAFFC). Wu Shicun could possibly have come to the notice of 
former Chinese President Jiang Zemin in June 1989, when he was deputy 
head of the Party branch within the foreign languages department at Nanjing
University and the huge student-led protests were suppressed.
Emphasising China’s sovereignty and security in the South China Sea,
Wu Shicun in his article appeared to hint that China would not precipitate
matters in this maritime region. In his article published in the South China 
Morning Post (May 9), Wu Shicun said that though COVID-19 has dealt a 
“body blow to the United States, including its military combat capabilities
and deployment” and “the virus has been found in at least 150 US military
bases and on four aircraft carriers”, the US military has nevertheless continued 
its “relentless pursuit of hegemony in the Western Pacific”. It has increased 
the number and frequency of its flight missions in this region and this year 
itself conducted four types of military activities in the South China Sea. He 
observed: “From the US perspective, the South China Sea is indispensable to 
– 217 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
its hegemony in the Western Pacific. It is a vital artery for US-style sea power,
and a handy issue to be manipulated amid China’s rise and growing maritime 
power. From China’s perspective, its sovereignty, security and development are 
all at stake in the South China Sea. The sea not only serves as a natural shield 
for its national security, but also hosts strategic sea lines of communication.
Therefore, the US-China competition in the South China Sea is both strategic
and structural. The Chinese are not so naive as to believe the US will ease off 
its competition with China in the South China Sea amid the pandemic. That 
is why China has calmly dealt with US operations, both in the air and at sea,
amid the viral outbreak.” He recommended that, “in the face of growing US
military provocation during and after the COVID-19 pandemic, China needs 
to focus on enhancing its capacity to safeguard its territorial sovereignty and 
maritime rights in the South China Sea” and expand the civilian functions 
over the South China Sea islands. Suggesting that Beijing’s maritime forces 
adapt to the changing mode of military operations at sea, he said they should 
pursue maritime cooperation with other littoral states in the South China Sea,
build more consensus and speed up negotiations on a code of conduct.
Pertinent in the context of retired PLA Maj Gen Qiao Liang’s and Wu
Shicun’s observations, is that a number of senior Party cadres and officials in 
Chinese think-tanks have, since mid-2018, in private conversations, blamed 
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s aggressive foreign policy for China’s growing 
international isolation, rapidly deteriorating relations with the US and poor
international image. They said that China continues to be heavily dependent
on the US, its technology and market.
The reports do indicate China’s heightened concern at the rapid
deterioration in US-China relations and Beijing’s desire not to further 
annoy Washington. The interviews in the Hong Kong media could, however,
suggest the existence of serious differences within the top echelons of China’s
leadership on ways to deescalate tension with the US and the reorientation of 
China’s foreign policy. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on May 
11, 2020.) 
– 218 – 
33. China’s ‘Big Two’ have Domestic Discontent 
and US-China Tension as Backdrop: India 
Finds Mention in US-China Exchange 
Domestic discontent and US-China relations are among the Chinese 
leadership’s two top concerns. To the discomfiture of China’s leadership both 
issues surfaced on May 21, 2020, the opening day in Beijing of the ‘Big Two’, as 
the plenary sessions of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference 
(CPPCC)—China’s top advisory body—and the 13th National People’s 
Congress (NPC) plenum—China’s version of a Parliament—are known. 
Xu Zhangrun, former Professor of Law at Beijing’s prestigious Tsinghua 
University and who has near iconic status among China’s academics and 
intellectuals, penned an over 2,000- character essay advising NPC Deputies 
on twelve things they should do. The essay was published in the Hong Kong 
magazine Mainland China on May 21. Xu Zhangrun has, incidentally, been 
banned from writing and using the social media! The White House also,
apparently coincidentally timed for release with China’s NPC Plenum, issued 
a 16-page document titled “The United States Strategic Approach to China”,
which effectively restricts engagement with China as US policy.
In his ‘advice’ to the NPC, Xu Zhangrun stated that the outbreak of the 
coronavirus and its rapid spread across the world had isolated China globally
and for this, blamed “the Axlerod [that is, Xi Jinping] and the cabal”! His 
first advice to the NPC Deputies was to comply with the people’s demand for 
a State Council White Paper which should include a timeline detailing the 
actions taken by the central and local governments during the initial stages of 
the outbreak and especially between January 3 and 7. It was in this period that 
China’s National Health Commission had issued a notice about biological 
samples and hazard reduction, and ordered the destruction of samples held 
by unregistered bodies. He insisted too that those held responsible must be 
punished regardless of seniority in the hierarchy. Second was the release of all 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
citizen journalists, such as Chen Qiushi and Fang Binbin in Wuhan, rights
lawyers, the leaders of faith communities, dissidents, and all innocent Chinese 
citizens. He demanded an end to the “persecution” of university Professors 
who dare to speak out and recalled that ten Wuhan University Professors had 
spoken out in February alone.
Xu Zhangrun made other far-reaching recommendations.These included:
immediately banning the “abhorrent” practice of internet policing used to
shut down the WeChat and WeiBo accounts of individuals and stopping the
intimidation of teachers, medical personnel and writers accused of ‘thought 
crimes’. He demanded that the government institute a “Sunshine Policy”
requiring officials to publicly disclose their assets; remove Communist Party
cells from all academic and educational institutions, particularly tertiary,
secondary and primary schools; enshrine the protection of private property in 
the Constitution and return the right of ownership to the people themselves;
and eliminate the state-sanctioned monopoly exercised by the Communist 
Party as China’s sole landlord.
In addition, he listed symbolic measures such as a “Wailing Wall” listing
the names of all who died in the national disaster and a sculpture in memory
of the men and women who warned others and acted as whistle-blowers, like 
Dr Ai Fen, known as the ‘Eight Righteous People’. He called for gazetting a
‘Dr Li Wenliang Day’ as “an annual reminder of the importance of free speech 
as guaranteed by the Chinese Constitution”.
Earlier on May 1, after dates for the ‘Big Two’ had been announced, an 
open letter written in Chinese and addressed to the representatives of the 
CPPCC and NPC circulated widely on the internet. Unlike Xu Zhangrun’s 
essay, this letter posed 15 specific questions, which, while targeting Chinese
President Xi Jinping, did not name him. Some of the issues overlapped with
those raised by Xu Zhangrun, but this May 1 letter appeared to have been 
authored by someone with ‘inside’ information. Among the more interesting
questions it raised were: responsibility should be fixed for the deterioration in 
China-US relations; responsibility should be fixed to ascertain who allowed 
the turmoil in Hong Kong for so long which has “destroyed the ‘one country,
two systems’”; how the Belt and Road Initiative was authorised without the 
approval of the NPC and “now this program is about to be aborted. Who 
– 220 – 
CHINA’S ‘BIG TWO’ HAVE DOMESTIC DISCONTENT AND US-CHINA TENSION AS BACKDROP 
should bear the responsibility?”; and who authorised sending military police 
to provide “special protection” to retired senior comrades and current highranking officials of the Party, government, and military to actually restrict their 
communications, freedom of movement, and visitors, and prevent the retired 
senior comrades from proposing a collective motion to call for an expanded
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Politburo meeting.
Issued in the midst of rapidly escalating US-China tensions on a number
of fronts,‘The United States Strategic Approach to China’, outlined the Trump
Administration’s assessment of China’s objectives and policies. Declaring that
the US sees “no value in engaging with Beijing for symbolism and pageantry;
we instead demand tangible results and constructive outcomes”, it said the 
“US responds to the PRC’s actions rather than its stated commercial threats”.
The document seemed to be careful to distinguish between the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) and the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and left 
ways open for discussions where necessary.
Among its highlights is the assertion that “Beijing openly acknowledges
that it seeks to transform this international order to align with the Chinese
Communist Party’s (CCP’s) interests and ideology.” It said that the CCP’s 
expanding use of economic, political and military power are “harming vital
American interests.” Probably to assuage the concerns of the larger Chinese
population, the document emphasised that the “approach is not premised on 
determining a particular end state for China”. The document explained that
the US’ “competitive” approach to the People’s Republic of China (PRC)
has two objectives: to improve the resilience of US institutions, alliances and 
partnerships and “prevail against the challenges the PRC presents”; and “to 
compel Beijing to cease or reduce actions harmful to the US’ vital, national 
interests and that of our allies and partners”. In this context, it said,“The United 
States is working in concert with mutually aligned visions and approaches such 
as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations’ Outlook on the Indo-Pacific, 
Japan’s Free and Open Indo-Pacific vision, India’s Security and Growth for All 
in the Region policy, Australia’s Indo-Pacific concept, the Republic of Korea’s 
New Southern policy, and Taiwan’s New Southbound policy”.
It detailed the challenges under the subheads ‘Economic’, ‘Challenges
to Our Values’ and ‘Security’. Listing the ‘One Belt, One Road’ (OBOR) 
– 221 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
under economic challenges, it said that it is “designed to reshape international 
norms and standards and networks to advance Beijing’s global interests and 
vision, while also serving China’s domestic economic requirements”. It averred 
that Beijing will convert OBOR projects “into undue political influence and 
military access”. Discussing ‘Challenges to Our Values’, the document focussed 
on the CCP and its “compellance of ideological conformity at home”. It listed 
the persecution of ethnic minorities like Tibetans, Uyghurs, etc. Referring 
to security challenges, the document stated: “Beijing contradicts its rhetoric 
and flouts its commitments to its neighbours by engaging in provocative and 
coercive military and paramilitary activities in the Yellow Sea, the East and 
South China Seas, the Taiwan Strait, and Sino-Indian border areas”. 
Appearing to give the rationale, it said the document rethinks the policies
of the last two decades and is guided by “principled realism”. It said the US 
is responding to the “CCP’s direct challenge by acknowledging that we are 
in a strategic competition and protecting our interests appropriately”. The 
“US does not and will not accommodate Beijing’s actions that weaken a free, 
open and rules-based international order.” It asserted, “We will continue to 
refute the CCP’s narrative that the US is in strategic retreat or will shirk 
our international security commitments.” The US’ new ‘Strategic Approach 
to China’ also warned that “the negative trend lines of Beijing’s policies and
practices threaten the legacy of the Chinese people and their future position 
in the world”. 
China’s reaction to the release of the ‘The United States Strategic
Approach to China’ was measured and not strident. Chinese Foreign Minister
Wang Yi avoided sharp criticism of the US at his press conference on the 
sidelines of the NPC on May 24. He said, “China has no intention to change,
still less replace, the United States”, and,“It’s time for the United States to give 
up its wishful thinking of changing China and stopping 1.4 billion people in
their historic march toward modernization.” Pointing to US President Trump
and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, Wang Yi said American politicians “are
taking China-U.S. relations hostage and pushing our two countries to the 
brink of a new Cold War.” 
The CCP-owned Global Times (May 23) noted that the document claimed 
that previous hopes for a “fundamental economic and political opening” in 
– 222 – 
CHINA’S ‘BIG TWO’ HAVE DOMESTIC DISCONTENT AND US-CHINA TENSION AS BACKDROP 
China have failed and called for the continuation of a whole-of-government 
approach toward China. The Global Times article was captioned “China 
Needs Flexible Approach as Relations with US Come to Cross-roads”. It 
interviewed Wei Zongyou, a Professor at the Centre for American Studies,
Fudan University and Zhang Tengjun, an Assistant Research Fellow at the 
China Institute of International Studies. 
Wei Zongyou described the document as “filled with a sheer hegemonic
mentality and every single sentence aims to protect US national interests”.
He added, “The US always hoped to change the world in accordance with 
its own will” and this “is the same approach with which it deals with China”.
Stating, “We can sense the US’ toughness and even menace”, he said “China 
must hold its strategic resolve and vision and adopt flexible approaches”. Wei 
Zongyou said that if the “US abandons its stereotypical mindset regarding
China” then “there is room for cooperation on regional and world matters”.
He observed, “The future trajectory of China-US relations depends on how 
the two interact… . China can still seek strategic initiatives”. Zhang Tengjun
took a more conciliatory stance. Assessing that “China-US relations have 
entered their darkest phase since the normalization of ties”, he said that when 
the gap is widening and the Thucydides Trap is becoming a reality, China must 
have a clear understanding of how China-US ties serve its own development.
Stating that “a stable China-US relationship is an important goal of China’s 
major power diplomacy”, he asserted that “this is not to cater to the US, but to 
create a favourable external environment for China’s peaceful development”.
The day after Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi’s press conference, the 
Global Times (May 25) listed six basic facts as an “objective view’ of China-US 
relations.These were: (i) China is a rising developing country. So far, it has not 
achieved the strength to pose a substantial challenge to the US, nor does China 
have such a will. (ii) The core of China’s foreign relations is development.
Chinese actions that can be described as “overseas military expansion” are 
negligible. China has been somewhat active in areas in which it has territorial 
disputes with neighbouring countries, but it has maintained restraint in 
general. One proof is that China has not engaged in any military conflicts with
its neighbouring countries for over 30 years. (iii) China expands influence
through its economic activities to the mutual benefit of the parties involved 
– 223 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and does so under the US-led multilateral trading system. (iv) China has a
different political system than the US and other Western countries, which has 
caused ideological disputes. “But China is generally not a country that exports 
ideology”. China’s “so-called overseas publicity” is only to increase the external 
world’s understanding of China and not to subvert the Western system. The 
West is aggressive while China is defensive in ideological disputes. (v) The 
US elites want to “shape” China and are annoyed that China has firmly stayed 
on its own political path. They worry that the successful Chinese path may
affect Western society’s confidence. (vi) The Trump Administration’s trade war 
against China “is indeed bullying”. The “America First” doctrine has “caused 
widespread resentment worldwide and China is not the only victim. Since the 
COVID-19 outbreak, Washington has been passing the buck to Beijing. This 
is the odious move of the White House and the Republican Party for the sake
of the 2020 election. This is typical international hooliganism”.
China and the US have both been increasingly critical of each other as 
the trade war has escalated. A Central News Agency report (May 18) claimed 
that since 2019, data collected by a WeChat account shows that 70 per cent
of the front-page editorials of the Global Times have been targeting the US. It 
said that among the recent 40 daily front page editorials in the Global Times, 
titles of 29 articles carry the words “the United States.” The proportion is as 
high as 72.5 per cent. The figure was, however, only 18, or 45 per cent, out of 
40 editorials over the same time period last year. In addition, the People’s Daily
virtually each day published a special commentary criticising the US.
Directly relevant for India is the statement in ‘The United States 
Strategic Approach to China’ that “Beijing contradicts its rhetoric and flouts 
its commitments to its neighbours by engaging in provocative and coercive 
military and paramilitary activities in the Yellow Sea,the East and South China 
Seas, the Taiwan Strait, and Sino-Indian border areas”. US Assistant Secretary
of State Alice Wells echoed this thought in her statement: “Flare-ups at the
border are a reminder that Chinese aggressions aren’t always rhetorical. The 
border dispute shows the threat China that poses to its neighbour”. Pertinent 
is China’s reaction.The reaction of the spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in
Delhi was tough and sharper than the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman’s 
comment at the weekly press conference in Beijing. Chinese Embassy 
– 224 – 
CHINA’S ‘BIG TWO’ HAVE DOMESTIC DISCONTENT AND US-CHINA TENSION AS BACKDROP 
Counsellor Ji Rong said on May 20 evening: “We are firm in determination 
to oppose separatist activities and safeguard China’s national sovereignty and 
territorial integrity. We are firm in determination to oppose foreign meddling
in China’s internal affairs. We are firm in determination to realise final 
reunification.”The assertive last sentence is particularly relevant in the current 
context of the multiple intrusions along the Line of Actual Control (LAC). 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on May 
28, 2020.) 
– 225 – 
34. Chinese Researchers Suggest Modulation of 
China’s Policy Towards United States 
The growing strain in the US-China relationship continues to cause concern 
in the higher echelons of China’s leadership. Chinese think-tanks have 
cautioned that the situation could worsen considerably more and some, like 
the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, have recommended ways to bring 
about a change in public opinion in the US.
In a 3,000-word article published on July 6, 2020, on the popular portal 
Aisixiang.com managed by China’s Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology, three researchers of prestigious Chinese think-tanks and the 
Renmin University identified stable relations with the US as essential for 
China’s development and said that Beijing should “actively manage” its 
differences with Washington. The article focussed on the West Pacific Ocean 
and the South China Sea. It equally noted the importance of managing 
“third-party factors” and, quite interestingly, said, “China and the United 
States should refrain from the urge to gather third party forces to block and 
counterbalance each other, nor should they force third parties to choose a 
side station between China and the United States”. This suggests a major 
modification of the assertive policy being followed by Xi Jinping.
The article has been co-authored by An Gang of the Chinese Academy 
of Social Sciences (CASS) and the Tsinghua University Research Centre for 
Strategy and Security; Wang Yiming, a doctoral student at the School of 
International Relations, Renmin University of China; and Hu Xin, a National 
Defence Technology Associate Professor, Institute of Strategy and Security, 
University of International Relations. The 5-part article said that Beijing 
should seek to stabilise its relations with Washington and actively manage 
their differences and competition. It said, “In order to effectively prevent the 
‘new situation’ from evolving toward full confrontation and conflict, China 
and the United States urgently need to reposition, deal with, and control 
the ‘new paradigm’ of mutual relations”. The report added that the Trump 
CHINESE RESEARCHERS SUGGEST MODULATION OF CHINA’S POLICY TOWARDS UNITED STATES 
Administration, which views China as a “strategic and economic opponent” of 
the United States, “will stick to the end in terms of competition with China”.
It added that following the tone and direction established by the White 
House, various US government departments, powerful institutions, and 
strategic think-tanks have gradually formed a “whole government” strategic
competition situation.
The report said “China’s policy toward the US has placed greater emphasis 
on struggle, and the competitiveness of China and the United States has 
increased significantly”. It assessed that the United States “believes that the 
essence of Sino-US competition on the international stage is the competition
between the Western democratic political circle and the ‘authoritarian camp’
led by China and Russia”. It added that the conflict of value systems and 
differences in political systems comprises the source of long-term mistrust 
between the two countries. It asserted, “China adheres to the socialist road, 
firmly maintains the basic system, and mobilizes the country to achieve the 
‘Two hundred years’strategic goal”.It averred that it “is impossible to trade core 
interests”. It acknowledged that “the development of structural contradictions 
on the ideological level between China and the United States will follow the 
rise of China. The deepening is more sharp and complicated”.
The article stressed the importance of maritime power and said “maritime 
strategic competition will determine the overall strategic relationship to a 
large extent, and the narrowing of the contrast between China and the United 
States will increase the strategic competition at sea”. Interestingly, the report 
observed, “The tendency of American pressure on China to concentrate on 
political systems and national sovereignty and security issues is to a certain 
extent, inspiring China’s awareness of victimization and sorrow, boosting
nationalist sentiment, and aggravating the atmosphere of public opinion
that is not conducive to the long-term development of Sino-US relations 
and will impact the rational framework for diplomatic decision-making
between the two countries from time to time”. Assessing that the US “is a 
major opponent that China has to deal with strategically and an important 
target for cooperation in many practical fields”, it candidly stated that China 
is “the weaker side of the strategic competition of major powers” and “should 
fully understand the strategic considerations of the United States, form a 
– 227 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
reasonable response strategy, and make the right choice of the times...China
needs to carefully assess the risk of these confrontations dragging the two 
countries into conflict”. 
Stating that “communication and dialogue are important traditions in 
Sino-US relations even in the sharpest rivalry during the Cold War”, the 
report listed a number of steps to keep dialogue open. These are: (i) “Improve 
the high-level dialogue and communication mechanism and establish an 
interactive channel that matches the importance of global power relations”. (ii)
“Reactivate the strategic dialogue mechanism whose efficacy is at a standstill
and build a strategic stability framework”. (iii) “Strengthen the institutional
dialogue and professional exchanges between the Chinese and American 
armed forces”. (iv) “Resist the trend of ‘decoupling’ and protect the mutually
beneficial and harmonious relations between the two countries”. The article 
noted, in an apparent hint to exploit the opportunity, “Generally speaking,
a large number of people in the domestic business, education, and academic 
circles in the United States do not consider ‘decoupling’ to be desirable and 
feasible. They also dislike the monitoring and restriction measures by the 
Trump Administration against Chinese people”. (v) Rationally and effectively
cooperate at the global security level when “China is growing into a global 
power, and the interests of the United States are increasingly extending to the 
regional and global levels”.(vi) Properly manage maritime strategic competition 
as “the West Pacific Ocean, especially the South China Sea, is becoming the
home of Sino-US face-to-face strategic games. It is also the practice for the 
two countries to conduct strategic trials and explore new dynamic balances.
As far as the megatrends are concerned, the two countries can neither ignore 
nor avoid conflicts in their strategic interests, nor can they completely exclude 
each other by strong means. Long-term strategic stalemate will become a
normalized trend.”(vii) “Clarify common interests and maintain normal 
cooperation” especially since “China and the United States still share common 
interests in a wide range of fields”. (viii) Manage third-party factors, namely,
China and the United States have close ties with other countries in the global 
arena, which has a profound impact on the interests of these countries. “China 
and the United States should refrain from the urge to gather third-party forces 
to block and counterbalance each other, nor should they force third parties to 
– 228 – 
CHINESE RESEARCHERS SUGGEST MODULATION OF CHINA’S POLICY TOWARDS UNITED STATES 
choose a side station between China and the United States” as the effect will 
be counter-productive. “The role of third-party countries should be defined as 
a common friend rather than an enemy of China and the United States”. The 
more the United States retreats in the face of global responsibilities, the more 
China should join hands with third-party countries such as the European
Union (EU) and Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). “By 
strengthening the role of third parties, it can help promote the formation of a 
benign situation in which China and the United States actively strive for the 
support of the international community, and enhance the power and flexibility
of the big country game”. And, in conclusion, it said, (ix) “China must adjust
its strategy toward the United States” and “focus on the long-term, focus on 
strategic thinking, maintain strategic determination, and work hard at the 
bilateral, regional, and global levels while striving to coordinate and interact 
with the US in a competitive game to create a new reasonable relationship
paradigm and avoid falling into the guilt of the ‘Thucydides Trap’ advocated 
by the US”. It stated that building a “Community of Human Destiny” is the 
general trend. The article emphasised that “whether it is China or the United 
States, or a third-party force whose behaviour is greatly affected by the trend 
of Sino-US relations, it is necessary to look at a broader time and space and
have a more human perspective”.
China’s academics and strategic experts are increasingly concerned at 
the worsening trend in Sino-US relations. They are conscious of the huge
differences in the respective economic, military and scientific strengths.
Suggestions for changes in policy towards the United States, though now
being more often articulated openly, are noticeably careful to avoid appearing 
contradictory to Chinese President Xi Jinping’s assertive foreign policy. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on July 
10, 2020.) 
– 229 – 
35.	 Tension is High Within China’s Leadership 
Echelons as United States Maintains 
Unrelenting Pressure 
As China-US relations deteriorate rapidly and tensions mount, concern is 
growing in the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) leadership echelons
about the next punitive steps that the Trump Administration might take.
Barely a week has gone by in recent months without at least one punitive 
sanction being slapped on China by the US. These sanctions are beginning 
to increasingly impact on the CCP and its members. Contributing to the 
concerns are worries in Beijing that US President Trump has a tough contest 
in the upcoming Presidential elections in November and could be tempted to 
take some military action against China to boost his ratings.
There are recent indications of heightened concern. On July 25, posters 
on how to handle air raids, which had not been posted for nearly 50 years,
appeared in Beijing’s Haidian district. A video circulating on the internet and 
reproduced on Twitter shows posters in Beijing and Shanghai instructing 
people how to go to underground bunkers if an alarm signals a military attack
and air-raid billboards reminding residents “how to enter an air-raid shelter 
quickly after hearing the alarm …”. Coinciding with the US-led naval exercises 
and the presence of the US aircraft carriers Nimitz and Reagan in the South 
China Sea, public announcements have been posted ( July 26) in some places 
along China’s southeast coast notifying retired People’s Liberation Army 
(PLA) Navy and PLA Air Force (PLAAF) personnel, including their families,
that they must register with the community neighbourhood committee. This 
is being interpreted as preparations for possibly calling these persons to return 
to military service at short notice.
A notice issued by the Shuiyun Street Community Neighbourhood 
Committee in Chongqing city, Sichuan province, on July 24, informed families 
of active-duty border/island officers and soldiers living in its jurisdiction, 
 
TENSION IS HIGH WITHIN CHINA’S LEADERSHIP ECHELONS 
especially those stationed in Xinjiang, Tibet, Yunnan, Guangxi, Hainan, and 
at other borders and islands, to register with the community neighbourhood
committee. On July 27 evening, the state-run China Central Television 
(CCTV) Headline News telecast an old clip of January this year of Chinese 
President Xi Jinping’s instruction to the PLA’s Top Gun Sixth Company
emphasising that the military must follow the CCP command to prepare for 
war. Using the 75th anniversary of its victory in the Sino-Japanese War this 
year, China’s National Radio and Television Administration (NRTA) which 
controls state-owned TV and radio broadcasters, held a nationwide video 
conference with its subsidiary entities on July 17, to arrange programmes on
the theme of the Sino-Japanese War during World War II and the Korean 
War. The programming will hype nationalism and simultaneously potentially
promote anti American nationalist sentiments.
 Around the same time the CCP-owned Global Times ( July 29) quoted
Chinese strategists and experts warning of the possibility of a military conflict
between the two nuclear-armed powers caused by the “dangerous US attempts”.
It quoted Chinese experts as saying that while China could be restrained in 
retaliating to new US provocations on politics, diplomacy or economy, because 
China’s policy-makers will not let the Trump Administration use them for 
his reelection, if Washington launches military provocations to challenge “the 
bottom line of China’s national security and sovereignty” then China will 
immediately and effectively retaliate.
Expressing concern at possible developments over the next three
months Jin Canrong, Associate Dean of Renmin University of China’s 
School of International Studies in Beijing, said that “the collective hostility
against China among US elites and policy-makers, which we didn’t expect,
will also make the US more aggressive.” He noted that “direct China-US
military conflicts, or even the severance of diplomatic ties, which used to be
unimaginable, are being discussed more frequently by the mainstream media
outlets and scholars, so the danger of military conflicts exists and is growing.”
The Beijing-based think-tank South China Sea Strategic Situation Probing
Initiative (SCSPI) noted ( July 29) that there is the possibility of small and
medium-sized clashes, which could involve ship collisions and occasional
firing incidents. 
– 231 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
On July 27, China’s Minister of Public Security Zhao Kezhi spoke at
the video conference of the National Public Security Agency. He emphasised
that “in the face of a profoundly changing external environment and severe
and complex situations, public security organs at all levels must resolutely
implement the decisions and deployment of the Chinese Communist Party’s 
Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core. We must … carry
forward the fighting spirit, make preparations, be on guard against different 
risks and challenges, and strive to achieve the ‘two safeguards’ in the actions 
of maintaining the nation’s political security and social stability.” The “two
safeguards” is a new slogan meaning to safeguard the position of Xi Jinping
as the core of the CCP Central Committee (CC) and the core of the whole 
Party, and to safeguard the authoritative and centralised leadership of the CCP 
CC. Zhao Kezhi also asked the personnel “to guard against and crack down on 
the disruptive sabotage activities of hostile forces at home and abroad, carry
out anti-infiltration, anti-subversion, anti-separatism and anti-evil religion 
struggles, and resolutely safeguard national political security.”
China’s leadership had started preparing some months earlier to minimise 
the deleterious impact of other possible punitive US actions. An indication was 
given by Zhou Li, a recently retired former Vice Minister of the CCP CC’s
International Department. Among the six precautionary steps he suggested
was that China must take measures to minimise the effects of US control over 
the Global Interbank Financial Telecommunications Association (SWIFT).
In an apparent endorsement of this concern, Reuters said ( July 29) that a
report by the investment banking unit of the Bank of China (BoC) recommended
that China should prepare for potential US sanctions by increasing use of its
own financial messaging network for cross-border transactions in the mainland,
Hong Kong and Macau. The report said greater use of the Cross Border
Interbank Payment System (CIPS) instead of the Belgium-based SWIFT
system would reduce exposure of China’s global payments data to the United
States, BOC International (BOCI). The report looked at potential measures
the United States could take against Chinese banks, including cutting off their
access to the SWIFT financial messaging service. Saying, “We need to get
prepared in advance, mentally and practically”, it claimed that if the United
States were to take the extreme action of cutting off access of some Chinese 
– 232 – 
TENSION IS HIGH WITHIN CHINA’S LEADERSHIP ECHELONS 
banks to dollar settlements, China should also consider stopping the use of the
US dollar as the anchor currency for its foreign exchange controls.
Other articles and reports over the past few months have similarly
reflected Beijing’s concerns. The first was the briefing given to Chinese 
President Xi Jinping and the Politburo by the Ministry of State Security
(MoSS) think-tank the Chinese Institutes of Contemporary International
Research (CICIR). According to Reuters, this forecast a bleak outlook for 
the coming year, including, because of US pressure, the possibility of social
upheaval and military conflict. This was echoed in an article in the People’s 
Liberation Army (PLA) Daily. Confirming that China-US relations would 
deteriorate further as the current US Administration was hostile to China, a 
report by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) suggested ways to 
arrest the decline. 
The CCP, however, appears to have got more worried as the US began
applying sanctions against officials who it said were directly involved in 
suppressing the people and human rights in the Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous 
Region and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR).
Included among the officials was Xinjiang Party Secretary Chen Quanguo.
This was followed by the New York Times citing US Secretary of State Pompeo 
as saying in late July that the US proposed to deny visas to members of the
CCP, including members of the PLA and those already in the US and serving 
in State owned Enterprises (SoEs) and other Chinese government enterprises.
Once implemented, this will directly and immediately affect approximately
300 million Chinese including 92 million CCP members and their family
members.This quickly emerged as the most searched item on China’s websites 
and generated lots of discussion and concern among CCP members who have 
been quoted as saying that 70 per cent of the children of CCP members at 
or above department level go to the US for studies. A Chinese official who 
wrote ( July 22) under the pseudonym Liang Jing said that the US “decisionmaking elite has made an important breakthrough …. in its sanctions against
the CCP. For example, the US has imposed restrictions on the entry of CCP 
members and their family members. I have heard the Party’s voice of pain”.
Indicative of the Chinese leadership’s anger and inability to persuade
the Trump Administration to change its policy, Beijing hit out at an ethnic 
– 233 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Chinese US citizen who it accused of being an “uber-hawk” and contributing
to the proposed decision to ban visas for CCP members. The CCP-owned 
Global Times and Hong Kong’s South China Morning Post both published ( July
23) reports identifying Maochun Yu @ Miles Maochun Yu, a China-born 
Professor of Military History at the US Naval Academy in Annapolis, as one 
of the influential sources and a principal policy and planning adviser on China.
It said, “He harbours some pretty dark visions about the world and AsiaPacific in particular” and “is clearly an uber-hawk”. The Chinese official Liang
Jing separately pointed to “the involvement of Chinese immigrant scholars
from Mainland China in this decision”. 
Chinese State Councillor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi’s unusually
unrestrained comments about the US during a telephone conversation with 
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov on July 17, similarly indicated the tight
corner that the Chinese leadership is in and the critical stage of the US-China
bilateral relationship. According to the report posted on China’s Foreign
Ministry website on July 18, Wang Yi described the strategic leadership of
the two heads of state as the biggest political advantage of Sino-Russian 
relations. It also said, “Wang Yi emphasized that the US nakedly pursues its 
own priority policies and promotes egoism, unilateralism, and bullying to the 
extreme, wherever there is a big country. The United States has passed on its 
own responsibilities and used the epidemic situation to discredit and dump 
pots in other countries. It has done everything possible. It has even created 
hot spots and confrontations in international relations, and has lost its reason,
morality and credibility. Wang Yi said that the US has regained the infamous
‘McCarthy Doctrine’and the outdated ‘Cold War Thinking’in its China policy,
deliberately provoking ideological confrontation and breaking through the
bottom line of basic principles of international law and international relations.
China will not be paced by a few American anti-China forces, but will firmly
defend its legitimate interests and dignity”.
Similar were Wang Yi’s remarks to French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves 
Le Drian on July 28, when he spoke about the severe problem in US-China 
relations. He told Le Drian that “[A] certain political faction in the US, driven 
by the need to lift [presidential] campaign prospects and maintain unipolar
hegemony, are going all out to negate the history of China-US relations, 
– 234 – 
TENSION IS HIGH WITHIN CHINA’S LEADERSHIP ECHELONS 
suppress China on every front, provoke China on its core interests, attack the 
social system chosen by the Chinese people, and vilify the ruling party.” He 
said that China will deal with the US with like-for-like counter-measures, but 
is eager to see the situation stabilise. He said, “China will take firm countermeasures against the egregious behaviors that undermine China’s legitimate 
rights and interests”. He added, “China doesn’t stir up troubles and always
exercises maximum restraint”, and, “We … strive to maintain the stability of
China-US relations through equal communication and exchanges with the
US side.”Wang Yi expressed the hope that other countries do not jump on the
US-led anti-China bandwagon.
An indication of the thinking in Beijing are the comments of Mainland 
China’s former official Liang Jing.He said that “due to his major mistakes in the
epidemic and the Hong Kong issues, Xi is in his most dangerous predicament 
since taking office. The US has a chance that it dared not imagine: to force 
Xi to step down, completely changing the confrontation between the US and 
China”. He added, “Even if Xi Jinping cannot be forced to step down before 
the election, even should Trump fail to win it, the hawks will have created a 
situation that the new government will have trouble reversing”.
The US is unlikely to ease pressure on China and Xi Jinping is expected to
come under increasing pressure. Xi Jinping is taking measures to counter the 
pressure and ensure his continuance and the CCP’s legitimacy and monopoly 
as the sole ruling political party. Meanwhile, a couple of unconfirmed reports 
have filtered out of Beijing and Shanghai claiming that Xi Jinping’s personal 
security has been increased and he changes the rooms he sleeps in within
Zhongnanhai, the residential compound of China’s top leadership. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on August 
14, 2020.) 
– 235 – 
36. Chinese Assessments of the International 
Situation 
China’s largest and government-funded think-tank, the Chinese Academy 
of Social Sciences (CASS) and among the most influential, the Chinese 
Institutes of Contemporary International Relations (CICIR) of China’s
Ministry of State Security, or foreign intelligence establishment, published 
reports in May 2020 assessing the international situation. These presented the 
assessments of CASS President Xie Fuzhan and CICIR President Yuan Peng.
Another assessment, which additionally listed precautionary steps that China 
should take, was published on June 29, 2020, by Zhou Li, former Deputy 
Minister of the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) Central Committee’s
(CC’s) International Liaison Department (ILD) now called the International 
Department. Yuan Peng’s and Zhou Li’s assessments had higher political 
content, but Zhou Li’s was particularly pointed.
Prior to his appointment in March 2018 as President of CASS, Xie 
Fuzhan was Party Secretary of Henan province. He has been a visiting scholar 
at the Economics Department of Princeton University and then completed 
executive programmes at the John F. Kennedy School of Government 
at Harvard University and another at the Judge Business School of the 
University of Cambridge. He is a full member of the Chinese Communist 
Party’s (CCP’s) 19th Central Committee and was also a member of the 18th 
Central Committee. 
Observing that because of the global economic slowdown and intensified 
competition among major countries in 2019, the stability of international 
security strategies has declined, Xie Fuzhan focussed on the COVID-19 
pandemic, describing it as now the most uncertain factor in analysing and 
judging the international situation. Fuelled by the pandemic, he said, various 
risks in the world economy have surfaced and continue to accumulate. The 
capital market is turbulent, crude oil prices have fallen sharply, and the world 
economy has contracted significantly. 
CHINESE ASSESSMENTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SITUATION 
Xie Fuzhan said new factors of instability have surfaced in relations 
among major countries in international politics. In a bid to deflect the blame,
he said in order to escape responsibility for poor epidemic prevention and 
control and to safeguard the political interests of certain individuals or groups,
politicians in some countries have politicised the fight against the COVID-19 
pandemic. He accused them of making remarks that violate generally
accepted moral standards and basic scientific common sense, “creating lies,
panic, discrimination and prejudice” and casting a “new shadow on the stable 
development of international relations”. Stating that the geopolitics has 
evolved and the international political system has been deeply transformed, he 
asserted that traditional and non-traditional security threats are intertwined,
and national security faces unprecedented challenges.
Referring to China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), he acknowledged that it
had been “greatly”impacted by COVID-19,but that despite this,BRI cooperation
still shows strong resilience, and China’s trade and investment with the countries 
and regions along the route is growing despite the pandemic. He claimed that
the pandemic has brought opportunities for the high-quality advancement of the
Health Silk Road and for the new Innovation Silk Road. He said that while the 
pandemic has had a major impact on traditional industries, it has simultaneously
accelerated the application of new technologies, such as online technology, 5G,
artificial intelligence and big data, thereby creating opportunities for innovative 
emerging industries to expand to countries and regions along the BRI.
A Foreign Policy ( July 6, 2020) article elaborated on the impact of
COVID-19 on the BRI with substantiating data. Citing a report by Gavekal 
Dragonomics, it said that the value of new projects spread across 61 countries 
involved in the BRI dropped 13 per cent to US$ 126 billion in 2018 compared 
to the previous year, with the figure falling a further 6.7 per cent in the period 
up to August 2019. Existing contracts also dropped 4.2 per cent over the first 
eight months of 2019. China, according to the report, committed to making
only two Belt and Road Initiative related loans of over US$1 billion in the first 
half of 2019: US$1.2 billion to Egypt and US$2.5 billion to Pakistan. Overall,
according to the China Global Investment Tracker from the American 
Enterprise Institute, China made 46 loans of over US$1 billion for overseas 
investment projects in 2016, with that figure dropping to 28 last year. 
– 237 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
CICIR President Yuan Peng assessed that the international environment in
2020,which has seen “sudden”and “perplexing”changes,will be a worrisome year.
He explained that in political rather than academic terms, he sees the world as
“going through changes unseen in centuries, but also coinciding with the grand
rejuvenation of the Chinese nation after 100 years of humiliation”. Illustrating
a few of the changes, he pointed out that “developing countries represented
by China have achieved peaceful rise independently without benefitting from
colonial expansion and waging foreign wars, which is epoch-making. In this
manner, China has achieved its rise, while the West finds it rather hard to cope
with.” He added that regardless of whether the US takes recourse to a hot or
cold war, it cannot stop China but, importantly, that “it is almost impossible for
China to achieve national rejuvenation outside the US-dominant system”.
He identified economic globalisation, political multi-polarisation,
Information Technology (IT) application, cultural diversification and threat 
diversification,Science and Technology (S&T) revolution,impact of the digital
age and social media as among the “great changes”. Yuan Peng observed also 
that at a time the “established international system is collapsing and while the 
new world order is yet to emerge”, China is approaching the political centre 
stage. Saying,“Great changes call for grand vision”,Yuan Peng emphasised that
China is in “presently the best period of its modern history”. He justified anticorruption, poverty alleviation, in-depth reform, the BRI and modernisation 
of governance as essential responses to the “great changes unseen in a century”
although they will impose economic burdens. He called for the pursuit of the
socialist system with Chinese characteristics and leadership of the Chinese
Communist Party. He declared, “The East is rising and the West is falling, the 
South is ascending and the North is descending” while stressing that strategic
confidence and will power are essential prerequisites for China achieving its
‘Two Centenary’ goals.
1955-born Zhou Li, a former career diplomat who is presently senior 
researcher at the Chongyang Institute of Financial Research of Renmin 
University and Director of the China Russia Humanities Exchange Research 
Center, observed that the Covid-19 pandemic had caused suffering and
economic difficulties around the world and that unstable and uncertain factors 
have increased significantly. He asserted that “under the leadership of the 
– 238 – 
CHINESE ASSESSMENTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SITUATION 
General Secretary, we have made arduous efforts throughout the country and
made tremendous sacrifices”, but there are new difficulties and challenges in 
resuming production and economic and social development. He said the Party
Central Committee demands that leading cadres at all levels “should adhere 
to the bottom line thinking and make a long-term ideological preparation
and work preparation for responding to changes in the external environment.”
Zhou Li listed the following six measures that China could take to respond
to the changes in the international environment: (i) China must prepare for
the deterioration and “full escalation of the struggle” in Sino-US relations.
Enumerating the string of punitive actions taken till now by the Trump
Administration, he anticipated that many more would follow. He said it will
be realistic to understand that “decoupling” is ultimately inevitable and that the
“difficulties and challenges China will face will be unprecedentedly complex
and unprecedentedly severe” as “the US ruling authorities continue to impose
progressive and omni-directional, multi-disciplinary crackdowns” on China. At
present, it is especially necessary to guard against the risk of the US pursuing
claims against China. (ii) China must prepare to cope with shrinking external
demand and disruption of the industrial and supply chains as, in the wake of
the epidemic, most countries have had to adopt measures such as “closure of
cities” and “shutdown”, resulting in a sharp decline in the demand for various
intermediate and consumer products.The orders of China’s foreign trade export 
enterprises have been greatly reduced, production of upstream and downstream
enterprises has been stalled and international transportation logistics have
been blocked. The unavailability of raw materials and unsuccessful delivery of
products has caused tremendous pressure on China’s growth and employment.
He said that China should actively adapt to the situation and adjust the global
industrial chain and supply chain, and develop a fixed chain, supplementary
chain, and strong chain. Domestic development should be accelerated and more
infrastructure projects within China promoted. China will need to participate in
international cooperation and competition under the “new situation”. (iii) China
should expect that it will take a long time to normalise post- the new coronavirus
epidemic and must anticipate the long-term coexistence of the virus and humans.
He observed there are still many uncertainties about whether the epidemic can be
effectively controlled, as vaccine development is still underway.Therefore, China 
– 239 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
must remain fully mobilised at all levels with reserves of anti-epidemic materials,
medical support, and clean up and reorganise food wholesale markets in large
and medium-sized cities to eliminate possible sources of infection. He stressed
the imperative of rationalising the medical and health system, reforming disease
prevention and control systems, improving the capacity of epidemic monitoring
and early warning and improving public health emergency laws and regulations
and public health emergency management and treatment systems. (iv) China
must make preparations for getting rid of the dollar hegemony and gradually
decoupling the renminbi from the dollar.The US’international monopoly on the
US dollar will threaten China’s next steps and become increasingly more serious.
He identified two problems, namely, the shrinking value of US dollar assets as
the US Administration prints more dollar bills, diminishing their value, and the
United States’control over the Global Interbank Financial Telecommunications 
Association ( SWIFT ), which makes international settlement and transactions
more difficult as the United States continues to impose economic sanctions on
Russia, Iran and countries having energy cooperation with China. He urged
China to accelerate the pace of renminbi internationalisation, accelerate the
promotion of larger-scale renminbi cross-border payments and renminbi
clearing arrangements, establish local currency settlement mechanisms with
more countries, and create conditions to maximise their use in the world. (v)
Anticipating that global food production will be reduced by 30 per cent this year 
and further impacted by the pandemic and disruption in the supply, demand
and circulation area of the grain market, he said China must prepare for the
global food crisis. He assessed that major food-producing countries are faced
with a large scale harvest failure due to various factors. Stating that the prices of
major grains such as corn, soybeans and wheat have risen by 30 to 50 per cent
and international speculative capital has exacerbated the rise in food prices, he
said many countries have launched grain inventory plans, suspended exports or
formulated grain export quotas, and strengthened control of the grain market.
Food shortages and the food crisis will cause social unrest in more countries
thereby accentuating the uncertainties of world economic development. China
is the world’s largest importer of soybeans and will be directly affected. It must
take necessary measures to step up food production, increase policy support
and subsidies for grain production, improve the grain reserve control system 
– 240 – 
CHINESE ASSESSMENTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SITUATION 
and emergency management mechanism, promote international cooperation in
agriculture and the effective operation of the global agricultural and food supply
chain, and jointly maintain international trade and market order.(vi) China must
prepare for the resurgence of international terrorism. Because of the epidemic,
many multilateral anti-terrorism mechanism meetings have been postponed
or cancelled and the international anti-terrorism cooperation process has been
interrupted.International terrorist extremist forces have,at the same time,turned
more actively towards the internet to promote Islamic extreme religious ideas,
anti-China speeches to incite anti-China hatred, instigate and plan terrorist
attacks and even launch biochemical attacks. He claimed some forces actually
cooperated with the United States to stigmatise China on the source of the
virus, and attacked and discredited it on issues concerning Xinjiang. Asserting
that terrorism is the common enemy of mankind, Zhou Li said China must
continue to strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation, especially
in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), Brazil, Russia, India, China,
and South Africa (BRICS) countries, Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Regional Forum, and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.
In addition to all the assessments underscoring the importance of good 
relations with the US for China, a couple of other threads also run through
them.These assert that a very high degree of uncertainty and instability can be 
expected in the coming year and that the adverse impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic will stay for a considerable length of time. CASS President Xie 
Fuzhan also referred to the difficulties confronting China’s ‘One Belt, One 
Road’, or Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), while Zhou Li recommended 
focussing on infrastructure projects inside China, thereby implying reduction 
in expenditures on BRI. Interestingly, during his recent ( July 6-7, 2020) visit
to Guizhou province, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang advocated promoting
domestic infrastructure construction. It is apparent that China’s leadership is 
preparing for tough times ahead. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on July 
10, 2020.) 
– 241 – 
37. CICIR’s Assessment of China’s Major Country 
Diplomacy 
The Chinese Institutes of Contemporary International Research (CICIR),
a think-tank of China’s Ministry of State Security, published its analysis of
‘Chinese Major Country Diplomacy’ in May this year. The 9-page report,
authored by Chen Xiangyang, Director of the Research Group at CICIR, was
divided into 6 sections titled: (i) Relations with Major Countries; (ii) Neighbour
Countries; (iii) Global Governance; (iv) Protect Sovereignty against Foreign
Intervention; (v) National Day Celebrations; and (vi) A New Era.
Discussing “Relations with Major Countries”, the report noted that 
despite being confronted by trade frictions with the US in 2019, which was 
also the 40th anniversary of the establishment of China-US relations, China 
held 13 rounds of negotiations between 2018 and October 2019 to try and 
settle differences and achieved positive progress in agricultural products and 
Intellectual Property Protection.The report observed that in Sino-US relations,
head-of-state diplomacy plays a leading role and Chinese President Xi Jinping 
and US President Donald Trump have strengthened consultations and 
negotiations through phone calls. It stopped short of listing the developments 
in the US-China trade war after June 2019. It observed, however, that the 
US had since June 2019 “discouraged and banned bilateral normal people-topeople exchanges” and China had to protect the “lawful rights and interests of 
Chinese enterprises and people”. It had also “warned the US that it is not a zero
sum game now”. The report said that “hundreds of US experts in academic,
diplomatic, military and business circles have declared they want better SinoUS relations” and that “US scientific institutions and think-tanks have also 
called on the Trump Administration to stop bashing foreign scientists and 
researchers and deterring international scientific cooperation”.
This section of the report stated that China has deepened strategic 
collaboration with Russia, and pointed to the June 2019 joint statement on 
strengthening global strategic stability as “one indication that bilateral relations 
 
CICIR’S ASSESSMENT OF CHINA’S MAJOR COUNTRY DIPLOMACY 
are at an unprecedentedly high level”. The third point under “Relations with 
Major Countries” noted China’s stronger cooperation with “newly rising 
countries”. It said that Chinese President Xi Jinping and Prime Minister 
Modi had “agreed measures should be taken to resolve the border dispute”
and that during Brazilian President Bolsonaro’s visit in October 2019, they
decided to expand Belt and Road cooperation. At the 11th BRICS Summit,
the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa confirmed they 
would strengthen cooperation in hi-tech trade.
It mentioned that China-Europe ties “inspire global confidence” and that 
during Xi Jinping’s visits to Italy and France “consensus on global governance,
Iran nuclear issue, trade, Belt and Road cooperation have been reached”. On 
differences between China and Europe regarding Hong Kong and Xinjiang,
China had “urged some European countries to take prudent actions about 
China’s territorial integrity since Hong Kong and Xinjiang are crucial areas in 
China”. Noting that China-Japan relations are warming up, it called for more 
efforts and discussion on China-Japan- Republic of Korea (ROK) economic
cooperation, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)
and the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).
Discussing China’s relations with its neighbours, the report asserted that 
“Northeast Asian stability matters greatly for China” and that “a new dawn 
is coming” thanks to China’s proposals on denuclearisation and the peace 
mechanism. Noting that Kim Jong Un had visited China four times, it said 
that during Xi Jinping’s visit to Pyongyang in June 2019, he had assured that 
China “would play a constructive role in long-term peace and stability on the
peninsula”. At the same time, it noted China’s efforts to promote trilateral 
cooperation between China, Japan and South Korea and that it had hosted a 
trilateral summit in Chengdu in December 2019. Describing the South China 
Sea as a “sea of peace, friendship and cooperation”, it said “China urged Hanoi
to back away from its legal threat to pursue international arbitration”.Asserting
that “regional rules are crucial”, it said, “China and ASEAN have agreed on a 
single draft negotiating text for the South China Sea code of conduct.The US’
excessive involvement is unwelcome”. It observed too that China’s Navy had
“expelled” a US destroyer which had come “within 12 nautical miles of a new 
island built by China”. 
– 243 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
A separate sub-paragraph of the report’s section captioned “Neighbour
Countries”, declared that “peace and stability in South Asia is in China’s 
interest”. It said, “India’s unilateral move to change the legal status of Kashmir
could deal a lethal blow to India-Pakistan relations”. China accused New Delhi 
of undermining its own and Pakistani territorial sovereignty and national
interests, but urged India and Pakistan to settle disputes amicably. Afghanistan
was mentioned, with the report observing that “Russia, China, the US and 
Pakistan agreed that negotiation is the only road to peace in Afghanistan”. The
report said that China had stepped up efforts to mediate since September 2019.
On global governance, the report identified building “a community with
a shared future” as a call for world progress and the BRI connectivity as 
providing momentum for a sustainable world economy. It enumerated China’s 
efforts in organising the 2019 Beijing International Horticultural Exhibition,
the Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilisations in May 2019, the 2019 
Military World Games and as well as China’s participation in the G-20 and
Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS) Summits. It assured 
again that “China maintains an UN-centered international order” and “looks 
for settlement of major regional hotspot issues, such as the Korean peninsula 
nuclear issue, the Iranian nuclear issue, Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Middle 
East, Syria, and South Sudan”. South Asia was not mentioned.
The section captioned “Protect Sovereignty against Foreign Intervention” 
began with the statement that “outsider intervention has undermined Chia’s 
sovereignty and territorial integrity in 2019”. Asserting that the Taiwan 
question concerns China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, it said, “ChinaUS gambling has exacerbated robust, unofficial Taiwan-US relations, but ‘One 
China’ is what people want”. Taiwan, it said, has lost seven diplomatic allies
since 2016. It said that the US, which is Taiwan’s only ally, is using Taiwan 
to “balance China’s rapid rise as a regional power”. The report listed the 
numerous steps the US has taken to bolster Taiwan and said, “China urges
the US to abide by the one-China principle and the three China-US joint 
communiques, and not to interfere in China’s domestic affairs”. It emphasised,
“China deters Taiwan‘s attempt to split the state sovereignty” and reiterated 
that Taiwan has no right to participate in international organisations like the
United Nations (UN),World Health Organisation (WHO) and International 
– 244 – 
CICIR’S ASSESSMENT OF CHINA’S MAJOR COUNTRY DIPLOMACY 
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). It accused the US and UK of “being
behind the pro-democracy protests” in Hong Kong and named Canada and 
Germany as the other countries. The report reiterated China’s rejection of
foreign criticism in its internal affairs.
The CICIR report described the National Day Celebrations as
demonstrating “the achievement, confidence and responsibility of China in
the new era”. Emphasising that “China stood up under Mao Zedong, became 
rich under Deng Xiaoping, and became strong under Xi Jinping”, the report 
asserted that China is now economically and militarily stronger than ever and 
Xi Jinping has called on the people to make more efforts for a brighter future.
It recalled Xi Jinping’s declaration on October 1, 2019, “There is no force 
that can shake the foundation of this great nation, … No force can stop the
Chinese people and Chinese nation forging ahead”.
The final section entitled “A New Era” spoke of the historic changes in
relations between China and the world. Listing the principles being advanced
by China’s diplomats, it said that the “five principles of peaceful coexistence,
peaceful development, and a community with a shared future for mankind”
contribute to international peace and justice. The report stressed that “relations
with major powers are crucial for China to expand the strategic space”. Saying
“Chinese diplomacy is seeking common ground while reserving differences,” it
pointed out that China has “built friendship and partnership with neighbouring 
countries”. It said that China maintains UN-centred international mechanisms 
and that the BRI has fostered the growth of countries along it. It asserted,
“Chinese diplomacy is essential to sovereignty, territorial integrity and national
dignity and for mutual understanding”.The report made specific mention that a
strong Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership in diplomatic affairs ensures
success, including in the Chinese being independent and excluding foreign
interventions in China’s pursuit of socialism. It said China’s non-alliance has 
prevented it from getting involved in the confrontations and conflicts between
political blocs. The report stated, in conclusion, that pragmatism and prudence
are best for dealing with the “enduring challenges from the US.” 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on July 
24, 2020.) 
– 245 – 
38. China Debates Policy Towards US as Biden’s 
Administration Takes Over 
China’s leadership echelons have been very apprehensive about anti-China 
actions that the Trump Administration might take in its last days. Zhou Li, a 
former career diplomat, who is presently senior researcher at the Chongyang 
Institute of Financial Research of Renmin University and Director of the 
China Russia Humanities Exchange Research Centre, had, in mid-2020,
warned that China must prepare for the deterioration and “full escalation 
of the struggle” in Sino-US relations. He anticipated a string of punitive 
actions by the Trump Administration, adding that “decoupling” is ultimately 
inevitable and that the “difficulties and challenges China will face will be 
unprecedentedly complex and unprecedentedly severe”. As expected, the 
outgoing Trump Administration has put in place a number of legislations and 
executive orders. These authorise arms sales to Taiwan, assert that the Dalai 
Lama has a determining role in the identification of his reincarnation, and 
impose sanctions on Chinese Communist Party (CCP) cadres and officials 
and limit the stay of CCP members in the US. All three, incidentally, cross 
what Beijing considers its ‘red lines’! 
Since the US-China trade war began, prominent CCP cadres, academics 
and strategists have blamed Xi Jinping for the deterioration in Sino-US 
relations. Saying that declaring China’s ambitious goals at the 19th Party 
Congress and adopting a tough stance towards the US was a miscalculation 
and premature, they argue that China is nowhere near strong enough to take 
on the US. They have been calling for reverting to Deng Xiaoping’s policy 
of ‘hide your strength, bide your time’. As the trade war intensified and US 
pressure on China increased, some well-known Chinese strategists and cadres 
proposed areas of possible convergence in a bid to arrest the slide in bilateral 
relations. 
Between April and May 2020, three Chinese think-tanks analysed 
different aspects of US-China relations and affirmed China’s need for good ties 
CHINA DEBATES POLICY TOWARDS US AS BIDEN’S ADMINISTRATION TAKES OVER 
with the US. In addition, two prominent Chinese gave interviews to the Hong
Kong media and identified areas of compromise with the US. Qiao Liang, a 
retired Major General of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) and co-author
of the best seller Unrestricted Warfare who is a ‘hawk’ with a huge following
inside China, suggested that reunification of Taiwan with the Mainland need 
not have a deadline. The second was Wu Shicun, a senior CCP cadre and 
President of China’s state-backed National Institute for South China Sea 
Studies and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the China-Southeast 
Asia Research Centre on the South China Sea. He hinted that China would 
not precipitate matters in the South China Sea. Wu Shicun also heads the 
Hainan Provincial Overseas Chinese Affairs Office and the Hainan Provincial 
People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries (PAFFC).
After the failure of the trade talks led on the Chinese side by Vice Premier 
Liu He, Chinese President Xi Jinping did not offer any compromise solution.
On the contrary, he has been obliquely, but consistently, critical of US policies
of ‘protectionism’ and its withdrawal from the climate change agreement.
Despite domestic criticism of the deleterious effects of the downslide in 
relations with the US, Xi Jinping has not wavered and has persisted with his 
aggressive foreign policy and hardline stance with the US. He has taken steps 
to reinforce ‘ideological education’ to counter US efforts to weaken the CCP.
His congratulatory message to US President-elect Biden was also delayed and 
issued only on November 25. In that, he hoped both sides would be able to 
manage and control differences, and focus on cooperation to advance relations.
With the new US Administration due to take office on January 20, 2021,
many in China, including the leadership, see it as an opportunity to improve 
the relationship with the US. Inner-Party debate on China’s policy towards 
the US has recommenced. While there has been criticism since early 2018 of 
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s assertive foreign policy and hardline response
to the US trade war, this has been muted in the past few months. However,
comments by US President-elect Joe Biden and his nominees for the senior 
positions of Secretary of State and National Security Advisor, Antony Blinken
and Jake Sullivan respectively, indicating that they would prefer talks to 
confrontation with China, have revived discussions on how Beijing should
engage with the Biden Administration. Sullivan recently co-authored an 
– 247 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
article with former Assistant Secretary of State Kurt Campbell for Foreign
Affairs magazine, titled “Competition without Catastrophe”.
Beijing’s response has been cautious, but positive. Several Chinese 
officials and academics, including Mme. Fu Ying, China’s former Vice Foreign
Minister who is presently Vice Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee
of the 13th National People’s Congress (NPC) and Director of the Centre 
for International Security and Strategy and adjunct Professor at Tsinghua
University, called for improving ties with the US. In an op-ed in the New 
York Times (November 24), Fu Ying made a strong pitch for “cooperative 
competition”. Careful not to fault China, she emphasised that “China does not 
want to replace US dominance in the world. Nor does China need to worry
about the United States changing China’s system”. She did add though that
“China finds it offensive when the United States points a finger at the Chinese 
system or takes action against Beijing for its policies on domestic matters” and 
that “the United States should be respectful of China’s sense of national unity
and avoid challenging China on the issue of Taiwan or by meddling in the 
territorial disputes of the South China Sea”.
China’s Foreign Minister Wang Yi and Ambassador to the US, Cui 
Tiankai have similarly in recent weeks reiterated the need to repair Sino-US 
ties, treat each other with “respect” and together address common issues like 
the pandemic and climate change. They, and other Chinese interlocuters, at 
the same time advised the US not to interfere in China’s internal affairs or 
slander the CCP. While calling for improving bilateral ties, they avoided any 
criticism of the policies followed by Chinese President Xi Jinping and held
firm to Beijing’s position where differences exist.
An editorial in China’s official English-language China Daily (December
3) observed that the current Trump Administration is doing what it can 
to cement in place its tough China policy, which has already caused some 
damage that is “simply beyond repair”. It warned, however, that a new US 
Administration “in no way warrants the kind of optimism some have displayed.
Not only has the US President-elect indicated that he wants to rally the US
against what he sees as a less than friendly China, but the recent deterioration 
in bilateral ties has fundamentally changed the political atmosphere for the 
China policies of the US. So much so that containing China has become 
– 248 – 
CHINA DEBATES POLICY TOWARDS US AS BIDEN’S ADMINISTRATION TAKES OVER 
a bipartisan consensus”. A subsequent China Daily editorial (December 24)
focussed on the need for repairing ties and recounted the mutual benefits 
of good ties. It highlighted the CCP’s unique role and position in China as 
a ruling party, and said, “The top priority for the two countries now is to 
sit down, have a comprehensive, candid and in-depth dialogue, clarify the
strategic intentions of both sides, and rebuild mutual trust”.
A number of prominent Chinese academics, strategists and CCP cadres 
have commented on the change in the US Administration. They generally
perceive it as an opportunity for China to engage and see how it can reduce 
US pressure. The majority, though, anticipate that Biden’s China policy will
be an “iron fist in a velvet glove”. They assess too that there is consensus in 
the US to contain China and “the evolution of Sino-US relations might
follow a trilogy: trade war - decoupling - full-scale cold war”. One analyst 
warned that the US is likely to pressure its allies to undermine the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). The focus of Chinese 
strategists and international relations experts is to prevent America from 
delinking from China while China builds its strength.
Reputed Chinese strategist and Dean of the Institute of International
Relations at Beijing’s Tsinghua University, Yan Xuetong cautioned 
against  “wishful thinking” about the incoming  Biden Administration. 
Predicting that Biden’s China policy would shift from the trade war into 
frictions in the political realm, he forecast that Biden will “take a harder line 
and invest more resources in these issues, resulting in more serious conflicts”.
Nevertheless, Yan Xuetong said, China should reach a consensus with the 
US that competition was at the core of their relationship, which would give 
the two powers a common ground for pragmatic discussions on how to
manage and prevent it from escalating into war. Zheng Yongnian, Dean of 
the Shenzhen-based Advanced Institute of Global and Contemporary China
Studies who attended a symposium hosted by Chinese President Xi Jinping in 
August to advise on China’s long-term strategy, asserted that China should 
not miss any opportunity to mend relations with the United States, but 
neither should it assume that relations with the US would return to how they 
were before Donald Trump’s rise to power. In fact, he suggested that Trump
could return in the next elections! Professor Zhu Feng, Dean of the School of 
– 249 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
International Relations at Nanjing University said, “China’s goal is very clear:
what it desires now is to continually strengthen and develop its economy and
technology. If it enters into a new Cold War with the US, then this will not 
be to its benefit.” Zhao Minghao, a researcher at the Institute of International 
Studies of Fudan University, said, “There is no reason to believe that Biden’s 
Administration will automatically improve Sino-US relations, but there is 
no reason to abandon the window of opportunity”. Emphasising that China
should not underestimate its own strength in guiding and shaping Sino-US 
relations, he suggested infrastructure construction, data use and protection,
anti-money laundering, anti-tax evasion, and anti-terrorist financing as areas 
of cooperation. He recommended strengthening crisis management to avoid 
direct military conflicts between China and the United States in the Taiwan 
Strait and South China Sea. 
Efforts are being made by both sides to defuse tensions.Hong Kong’s South 
China Morning Post (November 13) disclosed that after the US presidential 
election, China and the United States restarted their stalled behind-the-scenes 
diplomacy. Professor Wang Xiangsui of the Beijing University of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics revealed that several people close to Biden had contacted 
the Chinese and discussed with Chinese think-tanks how to restart Sino-US 
relations. Wang Xiangsui said the message from the Biden camp is “positive”.
The message sent by Democrats visiting China is that China and the United 
States should avoid a Cold War or direct conflict. Both parties must learn to 
manage their differences and find ways to coexist. He disclosed that a Chinese 
government adviser had earlier met Kurt Campbell and Jake Sullivan from 
the Biden camp and that in the past few years, some former Democratic Party
officials visited Beijing many times.
Equally substantive is the Wall Street Journal (December 4) report that the 
US Justice Department is talking to representatives of Meng Wanzhou, Chief 
Financial Officer of Huawei Technologies Co.and daughter of its founder, that 
could see her freed to return home from Canada after her  detention in 
December 2018, in exchange for signing a deferred prosecution agreement. 
Amid these below-the-radar contacts, however, China’s official media 
published two unusual and hard-hitting articles. These confirm that intense 
debate is underway on whether and how flexible Beijing should be while 
– 250 – 
 
CHINA DEBATES POLICY TOWARDS US AS BIDEN’S ADMINISTRATION TAKES OVER 
engaging with the US. While many Chinese analysts favour the opportunity
to mend fences, the more hardline ones will resist any yielding of ground. The 
high-level Beidaihe conclave in August reportedly endorsed a hardline policy
against the US. Both articles specifically addressed the domestic audience and 
targeted those who they said lacked adequate confidence in China and were
advocates of compromise.
Huanqiu, the Chinese-language  version of Global Times, on December 
20, published an editorial captioned “Do your own thing well and not be 
constrained by the US and the West.” Assessing that “the international 
environment China will face next is not optimistic”, it warned that “China 
is facing the challenge of international anti-China forces trying to isolate,
overwhelm and subvert us”and it must take preventive measures. Emphasising
the need to maintain “strategic confidence”, the editorial stressed that “China 
has accumulated strong national power after decades of development. Any 
attempt to crush China is wishful thinking”. It asserted that China’s status 
as a major trading nation is rock solid, and claimed that “except for the hightech decoupling promoted by the United States, the most substantive content 
of Sino-Western relations has not been significantly affected”. It maintained,
“The total volume of Sino-Western economic and trade cooperation is unlikely
to shrink”. Stating that “the most fierce conflict between China and the United 
States and China and the West occurs in the ideological field”, it added that 
“the vast majority of countries do not want to oppose China” as they consider 
protecting actual economic interests more important. The editorial advised 
that China “must adhere to our own political, economic and social agenda, free 
from external attitudes, and resolutely” oppose the United States, but while 
supporting what is beneficial to China.
China’s authoritative Xinhua news agency published an 826-character
sharply-worded commentary by “Xin Zhiping” —a pseudonym for a Xinhua 
media platform dedicated to promoting Xi Jinping thought—on December
16. It was aimed at Chinese citizens critical of China’s assertive stance towards 
America. Titled: “The ‘Worshipping America’ and ‘Kneeling to America’
Soft-bone Disease must be Cured!”, the commentary backed Xi Jinping’s
tough foreign policy. It bluntly criticised those advocating a compromise 
with the US and castigated those who are “spreading all sorts of arguments 
– 251 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
about ‘worshipping America’ and ‘kneeling to America’, who envy American 
‘democracy’ and ‘freedom’, or tout the current situation of human rights in the
United States”. It accused some as going so far as to praise the “anti-epidemic
ability” of the United States”. The Xinhua commentary charged: “The people
who ‘worship America’ and ‘kneel to America’ are often the ones who will 
praise the United States and disparage China” and added that they do their
utmost to denigrate and slander their own country and believe that “the moon 
in a foreign country is rounder than that in China”.The commentary said such
people naively believe that compromise to seek self-preservation and China 
not hitting back “can be exchanged for peace and quiet”. It declared, “We 
must resolutely struggle against them, pierce their painted skin, eliminate their 
influence, and not let wrong values confuse people”. In conclusion, it asserted:
“The Chinese people are not afraid of trouble, in front of any difficulties and 
risks, our legs will not shake, our waist will not bend. In the face of big winds
and big waves,as long as we have confidence and determination,and steadfastly
do our own thing, there is no hurdle that cannot be overcome. A self-reliant,
civilized and progressive China is the best cure for ‘soft-bone disease’.”
There is apparent consensus in China that while the US will persist in 
trying to prevent China’s rise and weaken the CCP, nevertheless China has 
an opportunity to reduce US pressure. The surge in anti-China sentiment
globally will make it difficult for China, but many Chinese experts hold the 
thinly-concealed view that Beijing’s considerable influence among the US 
power elite will be revived. There is confidence that big American companies
like McDonalds, Gap, Hilfiger, Adidas, Nike, Coca-Cola, etc., which, during
the previous Administration had little influence, will now be able to influence 
the Biden Administration’s China policy.
Renmin University’s International Relations Professor Di Dongsheng
spoke candidly of China’s influence at an event in Shanghai on November 28.
He said “It’s because we have people at the top. At the top of America’s core 
inner circle of power and influence, we have our old friends.” Di Dongsheng 
clarified that these friends are mostly investors in Wall Street, who have “had 
a very profound influence over America‘s domestic and foreign affairs since
the 1970s”. “We used to heavily rely on them, but the problem is that after 
2008, the status of Wall Street has declined and more importantly, after 2016, 
– 252 – 
CHINA DEBATES POLICY TOWARDS US AS BIDEN’S ADMINISTRATION TAKES OVER 
Wall Street couldn’t fix Trump”. He also touched on the President-Elect’s son 
Hunter’s ties to Beijing: “Trump has been saying that Biden’s son has some 
sort of global foundation. Have you noticed that? Who helped [Hunter] build
the foundations? Got it? There are a lot of deals inside all this.” The book Year 
of the Rat published by Bill Triplett III in 1998 details the extent of China’s
financial ties to the Democrats. 
Recent US media reports mention that China is establishing contacts
with persons close to the Biden camp. Chinese Ambassador Cui Tiankai has 
generally been active in Washington. China also has longstanding financial
links to the Democrats, including with Joe Biden’s son who was recently served 
a summons by a Delaware court. Chinese President Xi Jinping and Joe Biden
have a personal connection too. Xi Jinping will try and engage with the new 
Biden Administration, but will not compromise on issues of national interest.
He has already initiated steps to guard against US efforts to stall China’s rise 
and weaken the CCP. 
Zhou Li, former Vice Minister of the CCP CC International Liaison 
Department and current member of the Chinese People’s Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC), on June 22, anticipated six probable 
scenarios, and China has already begun preparations in some cases. These are:
(i) A deterioration of Sino-US relations and the full escalation of conflict.
(ii) A decrease in external demand and the disruption of industrial supply 
chains. (iii) Adjusting to the new norms under COVID 19 and the longterm coexistence of viruses and humans. (iv) Detaching from the dominance 
of the dollar and disconnecting the Chinese yuan from the dollar. (v) The 
outbreak of the global food crisis. (vi) China facing unprecedented challenges,
and reference to Xi Jinping’s speech stating that the CCP must “adhere to 
bottom-line thinking and be mentally and physically prepared to deal with 
changes in the external environment.” 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
December 27, 2020.) 
– 253 – 
39. China: Conference on Peripheral Diplomacy
 
In addition to the Collaborative Innovation Centre of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (MoFA), the Contemporary World Research Centre of the 
Chinese Communist Party Central Committee’s (CCP CC’s) International 
Department and the Peripheral Diplomacy Research Centre of the Institute 
of International Relations of Yunnan University, other centres participating 
in the conference on “Diplomacy Around China in the Context of the 
Coronavirus” included Fudan University’s Institute of International Studies;
Jinan University’s School of International Relations; Xiamen University’s 
Chinese Overseas Chinese Research Institute; Nanyang Research Institute’s 
School of International Relations; The Diplomatic Institute’s Asian Institute;
and Lanzhou University’s School of International Relations. 
The first and keynote session entitled “Challenges and Opportunities 
Facing China” was chaired by Lu Guangsheng, Dean of the Institute of 
International Relations of Yunnan University. The speakers were: Li Dingxin,
Director of the Centre for Contemporary World Studies of the CCP CC’s 
Central Liaison Department, Wu Chongbo, Vice Dean of the School of 
International Relations, Xiamen University, and Li Chenyang, Vice President 
of Yunnan University.
Li Dingxin assessed that the spread of the pandemic around the world may 
affect China’s relations with some neighbouring countries and cause pressure 
on China’s peripheral diplomacy. However, he believes that the challenge is 
shortlived. He suggested that the concept of a “shared destiny for mankind” 
will become more popular after the epidemic, and that there will be greater 
acceptability and “respect” for the concept of socialism. He recommended 
that in future, China should cooperate with neighbouring countries in the 
post epidemic era through the promotion of think-tank cooperation and local 
forums. 
Wu Chongbo said that the outbreak had caused global trade to
stagnate, the international supply chain was interrupted, and the tourism 
CHINA: CONFERENCE ON PERIPHERAL DIPLOMACY 
and financial sectors were hit hard, causing economic losses that would
exceed those of the financial crises of 1998 and 2008. Under these 
circumstances, he recommended that China should promote the “East 
Asian Model” to the world and actively help some countries in Southeast
Asia to fight against the epidemic.
Yunnan University Vice President Li Chenyang said that the borderless 
nature of the virus contributes to the enhancement of the awareness of 
the “Common Destiny”, the awareness of cooperation, the enhancement 
of interdependence between neighbouring countries and China, and 
enhancement of the public health mechanism between China and the 
neighbouring countries. He advised that under such circumstances, China 
should adopt a country-by-country approach to provide assistance in epidemic 
prevention to neighbouring countries in order to wean them away from the 
Western influence. Stating that China had correctly controlled and guided
domestic opinion and the public opinion of neighbouring countries, he said a 
comprehensive plan for the ‘community of common destiny’ between China 
and the neighbouring countries should now be fully designed.
The first session of the conference titled “Southeast Asia and China’s 
Surrounding Diplomacy under the New Crown Epidemic” was chaired by
Yang Yang, Deputy Dean of the Institute of International Relations of Yunnan 
University. Speakers included Lu Guangsheng, Zhang Chun, Professor at the 
Institute of International Relations of Yunnan University, and Li Yuqing,
Assistant Researcher at the International and Regional Institute of Tsinghua
University.
Lu Guangsheng spoke on “The Peripheral Diplomacy Under the 
Epidemic Situation: Taking the Mekong Subregion as an example”. He said 
that the new problems facing China’s surrounding areas mainly include the 
epidemic situation which may trigger other non-traditional security issues. He 
said that the risk of an economic crisis has increased and the public opinion
in China’s neighbourhood has deteriorated. He recommended that China 
should consider undertaking high-level peripheral diplomacy, establishing a
joint defence and joint control mechanism for the epidemic situation, and 
initiate regional health diplomacy. 
– 255 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Zhang Chun spoke on “Adjustment of Thoughts on the Interconnection 
between China and the Peripherals under the Impact of the Epidemic
Situation”. He emphasised the need for China to connect virtually with states 
on its periphery, especially during an epidemic. Asserting that for this, digital
interconnectivity is particularly important, he said that when building a public
health control system in Southeast Asia, for example, data interconnectivity
should be at the forefront. 
Acknowledging the geopolitical situation, Zhang Chun said China’s
digital interconnectivity needs to take into account the needs of a developing
China. The public health prevention and control system should be further
improved during the epidemic. After the epidemic, China can focus more
on how to increase exchanges and cooperation on poverty alleviation
with neighbouring countries. Pointing out that China will win the battle
against poverty and achieve the goal of building a well-off society in 2020,
he said China’s experience will benefit poverty alleviation in neighbouring
countries. It is also in line with the elimination of some forms of poverty
in the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. He said China has
already launched cooperation projects on poverty alleviation with many
neighbouring countries but, in the future, it is necessary to strengthen data
monitoring and data analysis in order to target poverty alleviation more
effectively. 
Li Yuqing spoke on “Public Opinion in the Post-Cold War Era with
Sino-Thai Relations after the Coronavirus”. Examining the assessments
of online public opinion by the Chinese and US Embassies in Thailand,
as well as opinions expressed by Thai netizens during the epidemic, she
concluded that although the United States has been trying to influence
Thailand’s attitude toward China, most of the Thai media have till now 
stayed neutral. She recommended that China should step up use of multilevel diplomacy and multi-dimensional discourse for shaping global public
opinion.
The conference’s second session on “South Asia and China’s Surrounding
Diplomacy under the New Crown Epidemic’ was chaired by Hu Xiaowen,
Associate Researcher of the Institute of International Relations of Yunnan 
University. The speakers were Zhang Jiadong, Director of the South Asian 
– 256 – 
CHINA: CONFERENCE ON PERIPHERAL DIPLOMACY 
Research Centre of Fudan University, Wang Shida, Deputy Director of 
the South Asian Institute of the China Institute of Modern International 
Relations and Liu Shu, Deputy Director of the Institute of International 
Relations of Yunnan University.
Zhang Jiadong spoke on “Sino-Indian Relations under the Epidemic
Situation”. He said that the globalisation process will not stop because of the 
epidemic and that globalisation and regionalisation will proceed in parallel.
China and India have not deviated from the basic principles of following
neutral policies in their respective areas of concern throughout the epidemic.
According to him, both China and India have considered each other’s
sensitivities on issues of concern. He suggested that China should provide 
humanitarian assistance within its capacity to relevant countries, including
India. 
Wang Shida’s speech was titled “The New Challenge of the Epidemic
Situation to China’s Diplomacy in South Asia”. His analysis touched on 
India, Pakistan and Afghanistan. He assessed that India’s economy will be
sluggish, and inadequate and that its outdated public health infrastructure will 
pose serious challenges. He recommended that China provides appropriate 
humanitarian assistance to India. He observed that Pakistan will face a severe 
financial crisis and that the normal development of the China-Pakistan 
Economic Corridor during the epidemic will also face severe challenges. He 
believed that China should help Pakistan promote the Health Silk Road and 
cooperate in building its health infrastructure. Wang Shida anticipated that
in Afghanistan, the epidemic will accelerate the US withdrawal and the war
will come to an end. He anticipated that a stable Afghanistan will help China 
promote its plan for a Silk Road corridor. He said that the development of
China-Afghanistan relations will be a test for China to demonstrate that it 
can be a responsible major power.
Liu Shu spoke on “The impact of the Epidemic on Sino-Indian Relations.
Can the Supply Chain be Cut?” He expressed the view that Indian companies
had resumed work and observed production better than expected. He said that 
after the epidemic, global dependence on India’s supply chain may be reduced,
but it will be impossible to cut, and suggested that it would be beneficial 
for China to transfer some industries, including raw materials, to India and 
– 257 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Myanmar. He assessed that reducing excessive dependence on China’s supply
chain will not affect Sino-Indian relations. 
The conference’s third session on “Diplomacy Around China in the 
Post-Epidemic Era” was chaired by Li Tao, Deputy Dean of the Institute
of International Relations of Yunnan University. The speakers were Zhang
Zhenjiang, Guo Yanjun and Chen Xiaoding.
Speaking on the “New Epidemic Situation and New Opportunities 
for China’s External Relations”, Zhang Zhenjiang said China has achieved 
positive results in the fight against the epidemic and set a good example for
the world. After controlling the epidemic, China has also actively participated
in the international rescue and carried out active diplomatic actions. Stating
that the epidemic has made people realise the ill effects of globalisation, he 
said China must now focus on regional blocs. He said this focus on a periphery 
strategy will be a breakthrough for China’s diplomacy in the future. He added 
that since Japan, South Korea, and Southeast Asia agree more with China’s 
anti-epidemic methods, they could become the starting point for China’s
future diplomacy.
Guo Yanjun spoke on “International Order in the Post-Epidemic Times 
and East Asian Cooperation”. He assessed that the epidemic situation will
have a very far-reaching impact on the international order, especially at the 
institutional and regulatory levels and that the war between the big powers 
may further intensify. Stating that the East Asian region can shape the
international order, he said a lot, however, depends on how China can handle 
this region. Saying that only successful handling will determine whether
China can shape the international order or not, he urged China to establish
people-centred diplomacy, promote multilateralism, and focus on building 
regional organisations.
Speaking on “The Trend of Regional Development in Peripheral
Relations in the Post Epidemic Times”, Chen Xiaoding observed that while 
the pandemic had not changed the basic role of peripheral relations in China’s
diplomacy,the complexity of peripheral relations is expected to increase greatly.
He said that in the post-epidemic era, China should promote regionalism and
supply goods to build a more effective strategy. 
– 258 – 
CHINA: CONFERENCE ON PERIPHERAL DIPLOMACY 
The experts and scholars at this conference examined China’s peripheral
diplomacy in the context of the global spread of the epidemic and suggested 
ways for China’s peripheral diplomacy to move forward in the post-epidemic 
era. There was consensus at the conference that by strengthening cooperation
with the neighbouring countries in the fight against the epidemic, China could 
project itself as a responsible power. It was also suggested that to overcome 
the differences in political systems and the diverse cultural concepts of the
neighbouring countries, China should encourage more people-to-people 
contacts. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on July 
20, 2020.) 
– 259 – 
   
40. 	Xi Jinping Launches Campaigns to Entrench 
the Chinese Communist Party Among the 
People 
Chinese President Xi Jinping has been under considerable pressure since he
began his second term at the 19th Party Congress in October 2017. The USChina trade war and the COVID-19 pandemic have considerably enhanced
the pressure. The Trump Administration’s efforts to target the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) so that the ideological commitment of its members
would waver would have especially disconcerted Xi Jinping. He has in recent
months redoubled efforts to refresh the commitment of Party members to
the Communist ideology and enlarged the scope of the campaigns to include
students in an attempt to ensure the CCP’s monopoly on power in China over 
the longer term.
Domestic dissatisfaction has spread in China, particularly among students,
academics, intellectuals and the privileged group of ‘princelings’, who have
their own networks of influence. The US-China trade war and the COVID-19 
pandemic have adversely and severely impacted the economy, contributing to
the sharp rise in unemployment and the uptick in prices and the cost of living.
The pandemic has, additionally, aroused an unprecedentedly high level of antiChina sentiment globally, which potentially poses a serious problem for China’s 
economic revival. Chinese economists point out that until the US and Europe
come out of the COVID-19 pandemic and their economies recover, China’s 
businesses and industries will not receive orders and the  US and European
Union (EU) markets will be closed.Thereafter too, as countries seek to diversify
sources of supply, China is unlikely to regain the former levels of trade. These 
pose a serious threat to domestic stability.
The Trump Administration’s actions on the trade front aimed mainly at 
China’s hi-technology have hit China’s technology industry hard. They have 
set back by at least 5-10 years China’s ambitious ‘Made in China-2025’ plan for 
XI JINPING LAUNCHES CAMPAIGNS TO ENTRENCH THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY 
catching up with the world’s most advanced technologically developed nations
by 2025 and almost crippled China’s two technology ‘champions’, namely
Huawei and ZTE. They could similarly impact China’s effort to modernise 
and ‘intelligentise’ the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). The US actions 
have, additionally, revealed to the Chinese leadership the vulnerabilities in
their technology sector. The ambitious strategic geoeconomic Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI) has also been impacted by the turbulence. All three are among
the areas where Xi Jinping has focussed personal attention.
Notwithstanding these pressures and his dented personal image, Xi 
Jinping has, in keeping with his character, not yielded ground to either 
domestic opponents or pressure from the United States. On the contrary, he 
has expanded Party controls and surveillance, imposed more stringent security
policies which mandate the growing use of facial recognition technology, and 
is continuing with the roll out of the Social Credit Management system, all of 
which have angered Chinese citizens who view these as an intrusive invasion 
of their privacy. Ignoring foreign protests, he has progressively tightened
Beijing’s grip on the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR)
and kept Taiwan under sustained pressure.
More importantly, Xi Jinping has doubled down on efforts to further
consolidate the CCP’s grip on China. Keeping in view the international
environment and domestic political imperatives, Xi Jinping has, over the past 
few months, initiated a number of new, major ideological education campaigns
across China. These have been accompanied by a publicity blitz through the
official media. The campaigns are designed to inculcate Marxist theory and “Xi
Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics in the New Era” in
the people, and the Army, with special focus on the academia and the youth who
are considered more susceptible to “liberal Western thought”. The campaigns
follow through on Xi Jinping’s 16-character slogan: “The Government, the
Military, Society and Schools, North, South, East and West—the Party leads
them all!”The slogan was incorporated in China’s Constitution in October 2017. 
In early July 2020,the CCP launched a new ideological campaign requiring
Party members and college and school students to study the “Four Histories.”
These refer to “the history of the CCP, the history of new China, the history
of the reform and opening up, and the history of socialist development”—in 
– 261 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
other words, the history of the Chinese Communist Party! Cadres were told a 
“key task” is to promote the contents in classrooms at colleges and universities.
Teachers reinforced the campaign with the instruction to students to “firmly
keep in mind the contents of the ‘Four Histories.’There will be exams when the 
new semester begins.” Many universities were reported to have incorporated
the campaign’s study materials in their course work. The East China Normal 
University in Shanghai, for example, incorporated the campaign material in 
the school’s seminar series so that the students could learn and preach its 
message to people outside the campus.
The focus of the “Four Histories” campaign was elaborated by Lu Yanqin,
Deputy Secretary of the Party Committee of Zhejiang Jiaxing University.
Writing in the China Education Daily (August 13) he emphasised that it is
necessary to “inherit the Red Gene, cultivate new generations, unite, educate,
and lead the young pioneers to be the successors of the cause of communism.”
He described the “Red Gene” as the “life code of the Chinese Communists”. 
He said, “It contains the nature and purpose of a Marxist party. It is embedded
with the ideals and beliefs of the Communists to fight for. It gathers the great
revolutionary spirit of the Communist Party of China; the original intention
and mission of the Communist Party of China”. He stressed, “To strengthen
ideological and political education for young people, it is necessary to carry on
the Red Gene well, and strive to cultivate socialist builders and successors who 
develop comprehensively in the new era of morality, intelligence, sports, and
art”.The “Four Histories”education, he said, will “help young people understand
why the leadership of the Communist Party of China is the people’s choice and 
history’s choice”. He urged that it be “integrated into the teaching of ideological
and political courses and related professional courses, so that young people have
a deep understanding of the hard-won New China’s red regime and the hardwon socialism with Chinese characteristics, recognise the great significance of
the Chinese nation to get rich and strong, and deeply understand the major
contribution of socialism with Chinese characteristics to the world socialist 
movement, and let the Red Gene flow in the blood of young people”. He pointed
out, “To inherit the Red Gene, we must guide young people to understand the
Party’s purpose. … the Party has always put the interests of the people first”.
Lu Yanqin quoted Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping and Xi Jinping—significantly 
– 262 – 
XI JINPING LAUNCHES CAMPAIGNS TO ENTRENCH THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY 
omitting mention of any other Chinese leader! Xi Jinping was quoted as
saying, “Our ideological and political courses should allow young people to
fully understand the purpose of the Party from the centuries-old history of the
Communist Party of China, and guide young people to establish a firm belief in
listening to and following the Party”.The article concluded that the “Red Gene”
was important for “realizing the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation”.
In a related message, the CCP’s leading theoretical fortnightly journal,
Qiu Shi (Seeking Truth, August 31) reprinted Chinese President Xi Jinping’s 
speech (of March 18, 2019) at a symposium for teachers of ideological and 
political theory classes in schools. Xi Jinping regretted that some schools 
still did not understand the importance of ideological and political courses 
and there were shortcomings in the selection and training of teachers and
the ideological and political courses. He emphasised, “As China increasingly
opens up and moves closer to the centre of the world stage, influences from 
other countries have deepened, and the struggles facing the ideological field 
have become more complex. … . the destiny of the nation and Party are closely
connected. Schools are, therefore, at the forefront of ideological work, and 
can’t be thought of as ivory towers or ‘peach blossom gardens’”.  He said 
teachers must have knowledge beyond Marxist theory, strict self-discipline,
and positive personalities. He exhorted Party Committees to take the lead
and stressed that the Party’s leadership over ideology and political education 
courses is the key to their success.
Xi Jinping listed eight “unifications” to promote the reform of ideology
and political theory courses:
R5 Unification of politics and academic rationality:   While political guidance
is the purpose of these courses, they should not come across as political 
propaganda. They must “guide students with the power of the truth” and 
“stand up to students’ questions of ‘why?’” 
R5 Unification of values and knowledge: The courses cannot simply preach 
values without the support of “scientific knowledge.” 
R5 Unification of “constructiveness” and “criticalness”: While the task of 
these courses is to transmit ideology, they must also inspire a critical spirit,
an essential characteristic of Marxism. 
R5 Unification of theory and practice: Political theory should have practical 
– 263 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
applications. 
R5	 Unification of universality and diversity: While ideology and political 
theory courses have universal teaching objectives and materials, they
should still adapt to local conditions. 
R5	 Unification and guidance and subjectivity: Courses should maintain 
a balance between the teacher’s guiding role and empowering students
through class discussion and debate. 
R5	 Unification of indoctrination and inspiration: While indoctrination is 
essential to Marxist political education, students should also be inspired by
the story of the Chinese nation, the Chinese Communist Party, socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, reform and opening up, and the new era. 
R5	 Unification of explicit and implicit education: While some people
advocate hiding ideology and political theory courses within other courses,
it is important to be confident in teaching these courses in the open. At 
the same time, there are ideology and political theory resources in other 
courses that should be tapped.
Meanwhile, there are signs that some Party cadres want to further expand
the scope of the campaigns. An article in China Education Daily (September
17) by Jia Hongxia, Associate Professor at the Beijing Open University,
stressed that pre-school education is the foundation stage of basic education 
and life-long education. Stating that “ideological and political elements are the 
shaping of the personal and national value system”, he proposed that children’s
thinking needs to be guided from the pre-school stage to help them gradually
form values that adapt to their own and social development.
Xi Jinping’s emphasis on frequent ideological campaigns in the Party
to increase indoctrination of CCP members in the last two years is partly 
a response to US efforts to target CCP members. Inclusion of the youth 
and school children in these campaigns is intended to ensure that the CCP 
retains its monopoly on power in China in the decades to come.The incessant 
ideological indoctrination campaigns also hint that the commitment of CCP 
members to ideology is weak. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
December 14, 2017.) 
– 264 – 
41. China’s 19th Party Congress Indicates No
 
Change in China’s Policy Towards Tibet
 
The week long (October 18-24, 2017) 19th Congress of the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP), which was held in Beijing, concluded as anticipated,
with Xi Jinping emerging considerably stronger. For those watching the 
Congress for clues as to Xi Jinping’s policies towards China’s ethnic minorities 
and especially Tibet and Xinjiang, however, there appears little prospect of 
any relaxation of controls. An indication was the sharp drop in the number 
of ethnic minority cadres elected to the new 19th Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP) Central Committee (CC).
In fact, the emphatic assertions during the Congress that China will 
safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity were reinforced by a letter 
publicised a couple of days ago and ostensibly written by two Tibetan village 
girls to Chinese President Xi Jinping during the Congress. The girls, Zhoigar 
and Yangzom, had written describing life in Yumai, Lhunze county, China’s
smallest town. China’s official news agency Xinhua reported that Xi Jinping 
replied asking them “to set down roots in the border area, safeguard the 
Chinese territory and develop their hometown”. Saying, “Without the peace 
in the territory, there will be no peaceful lives for the millions of families”, he 
expressed the hope “that the family would motivate more herders to set down 
roots in the border area … and become guardians of the Chinese territory and 
constructors of a happy hometown”. Xi Jinping’s reply, which contained the 
assurance that the Party will look after ethnic minorities, endorsed ongoing 
efforts by authorities of the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) to coopt 
villagers in guarding the border.
To prevent any protests or incidents like self-immolation that could cause 
embarrassment during the Party Congress, the already stringent security 
measures in force in the Tibet and Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous Regions 
had been further heightened. In the months leading up to the 19th Party 
Congress, China’s borders with Nepal and the Central Asian Republics were 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
sealed, foreigners and journalists prohibited from visiting these regions, and 
Tibetans and Uyghurs especially singled out for searches across China and 
denied admission in hotels. 
While neither Tibet nor the Dalai Lama were specifically mentioned in 
Xi Jinping’s lengthy 32,000-character Work Report presented to the 19th 
Party Congress on October 18, there were repeated references to “splittism”
and “separatism”. China’s new and potentially tougher policy on the Tibet 
issue was spelt out in the course of the Congress. China’s authoritative official 
news agency Xinhua reported on October 21, 2017, that at a press conference 
on the sidelines of the 19th Party Congress on October 21, the Vice Minister 
of the CCP CC’s United Front Work Department and its Executive Deputy
Head Zhang Yijiong, who was promoted at the 19th Congress to become a 
full member of the CCP CC, had reaffirmed China’s opposition to the Dalai
Lama’s visits to foreign countries.
Asserting that “the 14th Dalai Lama is not only a religious figure, but also 
a political one,” Zhang Yijiong made a remark with implications for India. He 
stated,“After fleeing China in 1959, he established a so-called government-inexile, whose goal and core agenda is the independence of Tibet and to separate
(from) China. For decades, the group headed by the 14th Dalai Lama has 
never stopped such attempts. As head of the group, the 14th Dalai Lama has 
never stopped his activities in this regard over the past decades.”The statement 
suggests potentially increasing pressure on India with regard to activities of 
the Central Tibetan Administration in Dharamshala. 
In an apparent toughening of the current policy, Zhang Yijiong warned
foreign officials against meeting the Dalai Lama, saying they “can’t get away
by saying they were meeting the exiled Tibetan leader in a personal capacity
as they still represent their governments”. Announcing that “any country, or 
any organisation of anyone, accepting to meet with the Dalai Lama, in our 
view, is a major offence to the sentiment of the Chinese people,” he expressed 
the Chinese government’s “firm opposition” to such meetings, adding, “We 
consider such visit as a severe insult to the feelings of the Chinese people…”.
Interestingly, amidst reports of restrictions imposed by authorities on the 
movement and teachings especially by Tibetan Buddhist monks and nuns 
inside China, Zhang Yijiong observed that Tibetan Buddhism was a special 
– 266 – 
 
CHINA’S 19TH PARTY CONGRESS INDICATES NO CHANGE IN CHINA’S POLICY TOWARDS TIBET 
religion “born in our ancient China”. He claimed, “It’s a Chinese religion. It 
didn’t come in from the outside.” With this, Zhang Yijiong, who worked in 
the TAR from 2006-10 as a Deputy Party Secretary, hinted that China’s policy 
towards Tibetan Buddhists would endure. His remark additionally implicitly
pointed to the authority of China’s ‘patriotic associations’ that supervise all 
religions in China and the authority of the Chinese government in religious
matters concerning Tibetan Buddhism.
Meanwhile, Xi Jinping has strengthened the CCP CC’s United Front 
Work Department (UFWD), which has expanded its activities. The UFWD 
with its increased personnel strength and larger budget, has enlarged the 
Seventh Bureau which looks after matters relating to Tibet and Tibetans.
Available information is that since at least 2016, China’s ‘united front’activities 
have increased in India, some European countries, Australia, the US and 
countries along the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). In addition to targeting
Tibetan groups and supporters, the UFWD is reaching out to opinion makers
and ‘influencers’ by offering cash incentives, scholarships through its ‘front’
organisations and trips to China.
Cadres in the new 19th CCP CC Secretariat and Politburo with a 
background of Tibet affairs will have substantive inputs on China’s policy on
Tibet. Wang Huning, who has in the past been a member of TAR delegations
to the National People’s Congress (NPC) and is now a member of the Politburo 
Standing Committee (PBSC), heads the CC’s Secretariat. The others in the 
Secretariat are Yang Xiaodu, a ‘sent down youth in the Cultural Revolution’
and till recently Minister of Supervision who served in the TAR from 1976­
2001, and Guo Shengkun who as Minister of Public Security (MPS) is
familiar with the Tibet issue and attended meetings of the Leading Small 
Work Group on Tibet. Three of the Secretariat’s members are persons with a
background in security or the military, namely, Yang Xiaodu, Guo Shengkun
and Huang Kunming, indicating a potential bias favouring progressively
tougher Party controls. Among others who will influence the Tibet policy are 
Politburo member Chen Quanguo, handpicked by Xi Jinping in August 2011
to be TAR Party Secretary and now Party Secretary of the Xinjiang-Uyghur
Autonomous Region; 67-year-old Sun Chunlan, who continues as Politburo 
member and heads the CCP CC United Front Work Department dealing 
– 267 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
with ethnic minorities and Tibetan affairs; and Zhang Qingli, born in 1951,
who is a member of the 19th CC and made the infamous remark describing
the Dalai Lama as “a sheep in wolf ’s clothing and with the heart of a beast”.
Interestingly, while there has been a drastic drop in the number of ethnic
minorities cadres in the CC, with only 15 ethnic minorities cadres in the 
19th CC as compared to 39 in the 18th CC, the TAR has, at the same time,
been given increased representation in the CCP CC. TAR Party Secretary
Wu Yingjie is a full member of the 19th CC. The number of ethnic Tibetans 
has also increased by one, with Qi Zhala (Chedak) and Luosang Jiangcun
(Lobsang Gyaltsen) both being made full members of the 19th CC. Chedak or 
Qi Zhala who earlier this year replaced Lobsang Gyaltsen as Chairman of the
TAR government and prior to that was Party Secretary of Lhasa municipality,
a position usually occupied by a Han cadre, is a first time member of the CC.
Lobsang Gyaltsen or Luosang Jiangcun is perhaps the seniormost Tibetan in 
the CCP and currently Chairman of the Standing Committee of the TAR 
Congress. He was an alternate member of the 18th CC. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on October 
31, 2017.) 
– 268 – 
42. Tibet has been Receiving Higher Priority in 
Recent Months 
High level cadres of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) do not often travel 
outside Beijing unless it is to ‘Red Revolutionary’ historical sites or because 
of a natural calamity or an important event or meeting. The visits, therefore,
in the short span of a month by the second and fourth ranking members of 
the CCP’s Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC)—two among the seven 
who ‘rule’ the People’s Republic of China—are unusual and significant. At the 
least, it suggests that the top echelon of the CCP is according new, enhanced 
priority to the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR). Chinese Premier Li Keqiang 
visited the TAR in July while Wang Yang, PBSC member and Chairman of 
the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) which is 
responsible for China’s minority nationalities affairs and religious activities,
travelled there a month later in August 2018.
The visits come in the backdrop of a sustained campaign of “patriotic 
education” for Tibetan Buddhist monks in the TAR, further tightening of 
controls intended to eliminate the Dalai Lama’s influence in the region, and,
acceleration since June 2017 in the overall strengthening of the militarysecurity infrastructure. The visit by China’s Premier points to sanctions for 
large financial investments in Tibet, while that by the CPPCC Chairman 
underscores the elevated priority being given to ‘social stability’ and reinforcing 
controls over monks and monasteries and religious activities in the TAR. The 
China-appointed Panchen Lama’s unusually lengthy sojourn in the TAR in 
July substantiates this. There has been elevated activity by the United Front 
Work Department (UFWD) since Chinese President Xi Jinping took over as 
Chairman of its Central Small Leading Group.
In anticipation of the new revised “Regulations on Disciplinary Actions 
of the Communist Party of China” issued by the CCP Central Committee 
(CC) on August 26, 2018, the official Global Times reported ( July 24) that the 
TAR authorities banned students in Tibet from religious activities during the 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
summer holidays. TAR Party cadres are also confiscating photographs of the
Dalai Lama found in residences and, on August 6, a traveller was apprehended 
at Lhasa’s Gonggar airport for possessing the Dalai Lama’s photograph. The 
authorities have begun enforcing the “Regulations on Disciplinary Actions 
of the Communist Party of China”, which include the stipulation that Party
members who believe in religion should leave the Party if thought education 
does not change their beliefs.
 Poverty alleviation is an initiative personally steered by Chinese President 
Xi Jinping. It has been blended in the case of Tibet with the overall objective 
of reinforcing the military-security infrastructure.The guidelines issued jointly
by the CCP CC Politburo and China’s State Council on June 1, unveiled 
an ambitious plan “to lift a further 300 million people out of poverty in the
next three years”. The CCP CC’s United Front Work Department (UFWD),
which is responsible for China’s ethnic minorities and supervision of religion,
posted a lengthy report of China’s authoritative official news agency Xinhua
( June 1) on its official website which said the Politburo convened a meeting
to deliberate on the “Guidelines for Rural Revitalization Strategic Planning
(2018-2022)” and “Guiding Opinions on Three-Year Action on Winning
Poverty Alleviation Strategies”. CCP CC General Secretary Xi Jinping 
presided over the meeting. Among other points, the meeting demanded
that Party committees and governments at each level must increase their 
understanding of Party ideology and genuinely implement the countryside 
revitalisation strategy as a main priority. It ordered that all locales and all 
departments must integrate the countryside with the cities. The Politburo 
clarified that different methods must be applied to different locales in order to 
comply with the sentiments of the villagers.
Interesting and partially explaining the high-level visits to the
TAR, was the frank admission at a press conference convened by the
State Council in Beijing on August 20, 2018, that because of the high
incidence of illness and poverty, achieving the goal of poverty alleviation
in the remaining three years “is very arduous”. Particularly identified were
southern Xinjiang, Tibet and Tibetan areas in the Liangshan prefecture
of Sichuan, Nujiang prefecture in Yunnan and the Linxia prefecture of
Gansu province. It was stated that in addition to the high incidence of 
– 270 – 
TIBET HAS BEEN RECEIVING HIGHER PRIORITY IN RECENT MONTHS 
poverty, the areas lacked “basic conditions”, were seriously backward in
development and had insufficient public services.
During his visit to the TAR from July 25-27, 2018, Chinese Premier Li 
Keqiang arrived in Lhasa and travelled to Nyingchi and Lhoka (Shannan).
He was accompanied on his travels in Tibet by TAR Party Secretary Wu
Yingjie and Chairman of the TAR People’s Government Choedak (Qi
Zala). Pointedly, Li Keqiang travelled to two of the three locations where 
it was announced on June 8, 2018,after the stand-off at Doklam, that new 
airports will be constructed in 2019. There is already a recently built airport 
at Gargunsa-Ali while the earlier one at Shigatse was upgraded with the 
addition of a new runway in July/August 2017. The airport near Yume village
in Lhoka will be additional to that already existing in Nyingchi. Yume village
is, incidentally, being developed under the poverty alleviation programme as
one of a string of ‘well-off border defence villages’ along the borders with 
India and Bhutan—a programme initiated by Chinese President Xi Jinping
at the 19th Party Congress in October 2017. Choedak (Qi Zala) had visited
Yume village in Lhunze county of Lhoka earlier from May 19-20, 2018.Li 
Keqiang also inspected the construction site of the Sichuan Lhasa Railway
at Nyingchi. Instructions had been issued in the latter half of last year for 
accelerated completion of this “important” dual-use railway. Li Keqiang’s visit 
focussed on infrastructure development and the economy, but considerable 
time was also spent on ethnic minority issues and emphasising ethnic unity
between Tibetans and the country’s Han majority. During this visit, he would 
certainly have approved large financial investments for poverty alleviation and 
especially military and dual-use infrastructure projects, including the airports 
and ‘well-off border defence villages’ in the TAR.
There was strong focus on ethnic minorities, religious issues and ‘opposing
splittism’ during PBSC member and CPPCC Chairman Wang Yang’s visit 
(August 24—26, 2018) to the TAR. He emphasised or “Xi Jinping’s Socialism 
with Chinese Characteristics in the New Era” and exhorted all the TAR 
officials to conscientiously implement the General Secretary’s and the Party’s 
strategy of managing Tibet and Tibet affairs,“closely focus on safeguarding the
‘Motherland’s reunification’, “oppose splittism and separatism” and strengthen
national unity. He emphasised the importance of alleviating poverty and 
– 271 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
building a well-off society,“deepening anti-separatist movements”and creating
innovative but effective temple management systems and fostering long-term
stability. While visiting the Sera monastery, he impressed on monastery cadres 
the importance of religion and religious activities to social and long-term
stability in Tibet. He asked monks to be prepared for “menace” and “rain”,
uphold and follow the “guiding principles” of the Party’s religious works and 
promote efforts to adapt Tibetan Buddhism to socialist society. He also sat 
in a ‘Young Tulku’s’ class in the monastery. It is pertinent that Wang Yang
did not once directly criticise the Dalai Lama by name or refer to the “Dalai 
clique”. Wang Yang was accompanied on his tour by TAR Party Secretary
Wu Yingjie, Chairman of TAR People’s Government Choedak (Qi Zala),
Executive Vice Minister of the United Front Work Department (UFWD)
Zhang Yijiong and the Vice President of the Chinese Buddhist Association,
Drukhang Khedrup Rinpoche.
There were at least three other interesting events in the TAR during this 
period which would have been intended to reinforce Wang Yang’s message.
The first was the visit by the China-appointed Panchen Lama, Gyaltsen
Norbu, who, after quite a long interval, spent an unusually long time in Tibet 
from July 19 till July 31, 2018. In speeches during his stay, he spoke in support 
of the Party policy. He emphasised the importance of loyalty to Xi Jinping
and the Party’s religious policies and said, “Tibetans must love the Party and 
the nation, uphold ethnic unity, and promote social harmony and stability.
If someone does not contribute to the harmony and stability of the society,
he is not qualified to enjoy the fruits of stable development.” He stressed on 
“the leadership of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping
at its core”. The China-appointed Panchen Lama also paid a visit to Lhamo
Lhatso, the sacred ‘oracle’ lake of Tibetans and gave religious ‘teachings’
including a kalachakra and visited the Jokhang and Tashilhunpo monasteries. 
The kalachakra ceremony and visits to the monasteries indicate that the Party
was continuing its long-term strategy of legitimising Gyaltsen Norbu as 
the Panchen Lama. At the same time, his extended stay in Tibet suggests a 
growing acceptance by the Tibetan people.
The other was the visit of the former 10th Panchen Lama’s daughter
Rigzin Wangmo, along with her children and husband, to the Jokhang and 
– 272 – 
TIBET HAS BEEN RECEIVING HIGHER PRIORITY IN RECENT MONTHS 
Tashilhunpo monasteries on June 20. The visit was reported by the stateowned China Central Television (CCTV). Rigzin Wangmo, according to 
some reports, enjoys a close rapport with the UFWD. The Panchen Lama 
and Rigzin Wangmo’s visits would be a signal to the Tibetans that the 
CCP acknowledges Tibetan Buddhist religious leaders and keeps a line of 
communication open to them.
Equally interesting, and possibly presaging a new propaganda campaign
to favourably portray developments in Tibet, is the meeting of Chinese
diplomats organised in Lhasa on August 21 and addressed by senior TAR 
cadres and Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Zhang Hanhui. Zhang Hanhui’s
portfolio of responsibilities includes external security affairs and foreign affairs 
management.
The visits to theTAR by the two senior central leaders as well as the Panchen 
Lama, bring into focus the fresh emphasis being given by the leadership to 
calm Tibet, emphasise ethnic unity and ‘social stability’ and eliminate the 
Dalai Lama’s influence. It also highlighted the push for completion of major
infrastructure projects like new airports, the ‘well-off border defence villages’
and the strategic Sichuan Tibet Railway. Implicit is that the UFWD would 
have similar lines of communication open to the Tibetan Buddhist religious
leaders in exile. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 13, 2018.) 
– 273 – 
 
43. China Intensifies Efforts to Diminish Dalai 
Lama’s Influence 
There has been a visible acceleration over the past many months in the efforts
of the Chinese authorities to diminish and undermine the 14th Dalai Lama’s 
influence over Tibetans inside China. Additionally, this year is marked by a
number of anniversaries in China’s political calendar including the 70th year of 
the founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in October, the founding 
anniversary of the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) in April as well as
the sensitive 30th anniversary of the Tiananmen ‘incident’ in June and 60th 
anniversary of the 14th Dalai Lama’s flight from Tibet on March 10. The latter
two would be cause for the most unease to China’s leadership.The current strain 
in Sino-US relations has added to Beijing’s worries. 
Despite the investment of billions of dollars in the development of the 
Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and steady tightening of the already 
stringent security measures in Tibetan populated areas, the Tibetans continue 
to be restive, with occasional incidents of protest and self-immolation.
Qi Zhala, Chairman of the TAR Regional Government said in his Report 
on the Work of the Government to the second session of the 11th People’s 
Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) on January 10, 2019, that 
a total of 180,000 people in Tibet were lifted out of poverty. Emphasising 
the support to Tibet “by the State and Party”, the Global Times ( January 11) 
warned people that the “hypocritical” side of the 14th Dalai Lama, who was 
“regarded as a separatist and fled into exile 60 years ago” should be clearly
noted. On March 5, 2019, in his Report on the Work of the Government to 
the plenary session of the National People’s Congress (NPC) at the Great 
Hall of the People in Beijing, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang too particularly
mentioned that special attention had been paid to poverty alleviation in areas 
of extreme poverty like the “three regions and three prefectures.”These include 
Tibet and the areas of Sichuan, Yunnan, Gansu, and Qinghai provinces with 
large Tibetan populations. 
CHINA INTENSIFIES EFFORTS TO DIMINISH DALAI LAMA’S INFLUENCE 
Wu Sikang, Director of the Policy Research Office of the Shenzhen 
Municipal Government, penned an ‘internal’ report last October after a study
visit to the US in August 2018, which was particularly critical of the US.
He specifically noted that the US had, after a hiatus of some years, increased 
financial assistance to the Tibetans from this year to US$ 17 million. In reality,
though, the overall quantum of US financial assistance has not increased in 
the past couple of years, but the amount allocated for Tibet related activities 
in India and Nepal has this year been doubled from US$ 3 million to US$ 
6 million. This has certainly aroused Beijing’s suspicions and its concern is 
reflected to an extent in the enhanced attention being paid to Nepal. The 
announcement (February 22) by Nepal’s Transport Minister, for example, that 
Nepal will use Chinese gauge standards for a planned nationwide rail network,
points to China’s long-term interest in Nepal. China has for long apprehended 
that Nepal would be used by “hostile foreign powers” as a launch pad for antiChina activities by the Tibetans inside the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR).
Separately, Hu Shisheng, Director of the Institute of South and Southeast 
Asian and Oceania Studies in Beijing, touched on US involvement in a remark 
to the Global Times ( January 11). He said,“Though some US politicians might
continue to play the Tibet card against China in 2019 on issues like human 
rights, China should ignore those political tricks and focus on exploring a
diverse development approach to the region.” 
The Chinese leadership’s attention will particularly be focussed on the 
Dalai Lama’s annual message to the Tibetans on the March 10. This comes 
in the midst of the 10- day plenary session of the National People’s Congress 
(NPC)—loosely called China’s Parliament—underway in Beijing since
March 5, amid heavy security. Contributing to Beijing’s increased nervousness 
is the apprehension in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership
echelons that the US has increased support to the Tibetans. Their concerns 
are reinforced by indicators that the Tibetans in China continue to venerate 
the Dalai Lama. 
The TAR authorities have taken visibly heightened security precautions 
this year. Tibet has been placed off-limits to foreign and domestic tourists 
for an extended period this year from January 30 till April 30. On January
29, ahead of the Tibetan New Year ‘Losar’, the Executive Vice-Chairman of 
– 275 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
the TAR Party Committee, inspected Lhasa’s two best known monasteries 
of Drepung and Gaden. Here he emphasised that “Tibet’s stability is vital
to national stability, and maintaining Tibet’s security is akin to safeguarding
national security.” Later, on March 7, large contingents of armed police and 
armoured personnel carriers paraded through Lhasa and the square in front 
of Potala Palace. 
A special high-level meeting was also convened at the TAR Party School
in Lhasa on February 21 to discuss how to prevent “major risks to national
sovereignty”and security. Senior TAR leaders attended, including the Chairman
of the TAR People’s Government, the Political Commissar of the PLA Garrison 
in Tibet and the head of the TAR’s security apparatus.The seminar was addressed
by TAR Party Secretary Wu Yingjie. He urged cadres to cooperate with the
Party in times of “new problems” and “new challenges” and called on them
to intensify the “anti-separatist struggle”, proactively take social stability—a
euphemism for security measures—initiatives to dilute the “negative influence
of religion”, carry on the fight against the “Dalai clique” and achieve sustainable
long-term stability. He asserted, in this context, the importance of accelerating
construction of “well-off ” border villages which are conceived as a protective
ring around the TAR’s international borders. Wu Yingjie has, incidentally, made
a direct critical reference to the “Dalai clique” after a long time!
Reflecting the CCP leadership’s concerns, the Publicity Department of 
the TAR Regional Commission for Discipline Inspection on February 1,
2019, released a 46- minute, 4-part video, which was aired on Tibet Television 
from January 28 to 31. It highlighted that Party officials having religious
beliefs or “alleged” involvement in “separatism” or corruption were punished.
The report bluntly accused some “two-faced” people in Tibet of claiming
loyalty to the Party while secretly sympathising with, and even working for,
“separatists”. It was not clear how many Party members were exposed and
punished and for what specific violations, though the video revealed that a 
total of 215 people had been punished as of October 2018. Xiong Kunxin, an 
Ethnic Studies Professor at Tibet University in Lhasa was, however, quoted as 
saying that the regional government had already identified these people and 
was strengthening regulations to dismiss them.
CCP cadres are already deployed in each village of the TAR, thus,expanding 
– 276 – 
CHINA INTENSIFIES EFFORTS TO DIMINISH DALAI LAMA’S INFLUENCE 
Party surveillance. Following the 19th Party Congress in November 2017, the 
state-run Tibet Daily disclosed that more than 20,000 Party cadres had been 
sent to the villages and to 7,000 monasteries, to preach the Party’s message to
the Tibetan people. China’s official media on February 21, 2019, asserted that 
800,000 Tibetans had been ‘educated’ in the spirit of the 19th Party Congress 
over the past 18 months and attributed this to holding 9,000 seminars and
distributing 70,000 copies of publicity materials across the TAR.
Now in apparent confirmation that it had been decided to embark on 
a broader programme, the TAR authorities announced on January 22, 2019,
that a new training camp had opened in Shigatse in Tibet under paramilitary 
supervision to “correct” and “mould” the thinking of Party cadres. It has been 
tasked to carry out political “education” in the broader Tibetan society. It was 
separately announced that a large ‘Tibet Youth Palace’ will be opened in Lhasa
in May 2019 to strengthen “patriotic education” among young people.
The Chinese appointed Panchen Lama, Gyaltsen Norbu, has also been 
coopted in this effort. Speaking at a symposium on February 3, on the 
occasion of the 30th anniversary of the 10th Panchen Lama organised by
the China Tibetology Research Centre, Gyaltsen Norbu, spoke of the 10th
Panchen Lama’s dedication for the Chinese nation. He claimed that “separatist
forces”—referring to the Dalai Lama and Tibetans outside China -- were
distorting and misusing the speeches of the 10th Panchen Lama and that he 
had never in his life once lost confidence in the Communist Party. He accused 
these “separatist forces” of misleading and deceiving the Tibetan people. The 
head of the CCP Central Committee (CC) United Front Work Department 
(UFWD) also met Gyaltsen Norbu on February 26, when he complimented
him on the progress in his education.
Confirming that efforts to control and regulate the worship of Tibetan 
Buddhism are part of the planned central policy, the 48-year old Mayor of 
Lhasa and ethnic Tibetan, Guo Guo, told the Tibetan Deputies to the NPC
and journalists in the Great Hall of the People on March 7, “In 2018, Lhasa 
… took a clear-cut stand in eliminating the negative influence the Dalai 
Lama exerted via religion and took great effort in ridding the passive religious
influence.” He added that the number of days spent observing religious events,
and the number of people attending them had both been reduced to less than 
– 277 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
10 per cent! Large sections of Tibetans comprising students, government and 
Party cadres and pensioners are known to have been warned that taking part in 
religious ceremonies and practices would attract punitive measures.The recent 
remarks of the Lhasa Mayor suggest that a number of activities of monks and 
monasteries have been curtailed. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on March 
9, 2019.) 
– 278 – 
44. Tibet Autonomous Region’s Expenditure on 
Public Security 
Tibetans have till this day not acquiesced to China’s occupation of Tibet or 
large portions of its territory being merged with the neighbouring XinjiangUyghur Autonomous Region and the Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu and Yunnan 
provinces to create the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) in September 
1965. In the process, Tibet was reduced in area from 2.5 million sq km to 
1.2 million sq km. Tibetans in exile and the Tibetan Administration in 
Dharamshala continue to call it Cholka- Sum, or Greater Tibet. The Tibet 
Autonomous Region (TAR), as it was renamed by the Chinese Communist 
regime in Beijing, has been restive since the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) 
marched into Lhasa and occupied Tibet in May 1951. China has expended 
considerable sums on maintaining its hold on Tibet, suppressing protests by
the Tibetans and persuading them to accept the Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP). Beijing’s policy towards Nepal has also, till very recently, been almost 
solely driven by its perception that Nepal could be used by “hostile foreign 
forces” as a launch pad for creating turmoil in Tibet.
After the widespread and violent riots that occurred in Tibet in 1988 
and again in 2008, Beijing began devoting greater attention to the Tibet 
Autonomous Region. Security, or “stability maintenance” as the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) leaders euphemistically refer to it, became a high 
priority. Expenditure on the security apparatus in the Tibet Autonomous 
Region (TAR) and its Public Security Bureau (PSB) consequently increased 
steadily each year after 2008. While Guangdong province continued to receive 
the highest budgetary allocation for public security, till 2018, the TAR was 
second, with the troubled Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR) a 
close third. 
Two consecutive TAR Party Secretaries, namely, Zhang Qingli (November 
2005–August 2011) and Chen Quanguo (August 2011–August 2016), put in 
place innovative, new security structures in the TAR. Chen Quanguo was, 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
incidentally, appointed at the express behest of then Chinese Vice President 
Xi Jinping and as reward for his good work was later elevated to the CCP’s 
Politburo and appointed Party Secretary of the Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous 
Region. The innovative security measures included the “Iron Grid” system 
(wanggehua guanli, 㖁Ṭॆ㇑⨶) of police stations located at distances of 500 
metres from each other and designed to ensure that security personnel reach 
the scene of an incident within seven minutes of a report; and the “Skynet”
(tianwang gongcheng, ཙ㖁ᐕ〻), an electronic eavesdropping system to 
augment other surveillance systems by monitoring all landline, mobile and 
satellite communications, internet traffic, etc. The “Skynet” was augmented in
2015-16 by the “Bright Snow Project” (xueliang gongcheng, 䴚Ӟᐕ〻), which 
expanded “Skynet” coverage by incorporating the TAR’s rural areas. Ironically,
an unintended benefit for the Tibetans was the four-fold increase—mainly
of Tibetans—in recruitment to the TAR Public Security Bureau (PSB) to
monitor internet and mobile telephone traffic!
State surveillance in the TAR has since expanded to include that by the 
CCP, which has deployed one Party cadre to each village.This January, another 
year-long campaign titled “One Million Policemen into Ten Million Homes”,
ostensibly to maintain ‘zero distance’ between the police and the people, was 
launched. 
Under Chinese President Xi Jinping, spending on domestic security 
during 2013-17, grew 34 per cent faster than total spending.The budget for the
Public Security Bureau (PSB), or domestic security, in 2014 was higher than
the national defence budget of US$141.45 billion. In 2016, China’s national 
domestic security spending was US$ 175 billion and in 2017, it was US$197 
billion. Spending on PSB and police rose by 54 per cent in 2016. The Wall 
Street Journal on March 6, 2018, said spending on domestic security exceeded
the defence budget by at least 20 per cent. In 2019, the National People’s 
Congress (NPC) announced a PSB budget of Yuan 178.78 billion or up by
45 per cent. This amount, however, reflects only the central expenditure and 
not that of the provinces or subordinate administrative divisions. The national 
defence budget was Yuan 1.19 trillion (about $177.61 billion).
Credible reports indicate that domestic security spending in the Xinjiang
Uyghur Autonomous Region (UAR ) increased from RMB 5.45 billion in 
– 280 – 
TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION’S EXPENDITURE ON PUBLIC SECURITY 
2007 to RMB 57.95 billion in 2017, reflecting annual increases of 2 to 3 times 
the national average and even higher than the increases in the TAR. Increases 
were noticed in the TAR’s PSB budget too, which increased by 28 per cent
each year since 2007. Spending on the TAR PSB and the police rose by 54 per
cent in 2016. 
The upward trend in the TAR’s public security budget has continued this
year.The budget for public security for the TAR for 2019 approved by the NPC
in March 2019 was Yuan 2579 billion.The allocation for 2018 was Yuan 1,991.10 
billion and for 2017 it was Yuan 1,886. 75 billion. The real figures are, however,
considerably higher! Not included in the TAR Public Security Department’s 
budget are the expenditures towards the Anti-Terrorist Special Reconnaissance
Team, Special Service Bureau, Border Inspection Headquarters, Civil Aviation
Bureau of the Tibet Regional Bureau, Tibet Police Officer College, and Tibet
Autonomous Region Traffic Management Bureau.
Official TAR documents show that the TAR PSB’s budget includes 
expenditure only on the Public Security Department Office, Political 
Department, Police Security Department, District Discipline Inspection
Commission, Public Security Department’s Discipline Inspection and
Supervision Team, Party Committee, Police Inspector Corps, Economic 
Crime Investigation Corps, and Public Security Department’s Management
Corps, Supervisory Management Corps, Criminal Investigation Corps, 
Exit and Entry Management Corps, Network Security and Security Corps,
Legal Corps, Command Centre, Anti-drug Corps, Science and Technology
Information Corps, Audit Office, etc. The TAR PSB has more than 20 
department-level agencies, 14 sub-departmental agencies, and 74 bureaucratic 
departments within the entire agency.
Though there are offices of the Ministry of State Security (MoSS) in
TAR, the expenditure on national security in the TAR is listed separately and
in 2018 totalled Yuan (RMB) 11,069.51billion.
The TAR Public Security Department is under the jurisdiction of the 
TAR Party Committee and TAR People’s Government. A similar arrangement 
prevails at the level of the administrative districts and below where a Deputy
Party Secretary of the district or county is in charge of public security and
chairs the Political and Legal Affairs Commission. 
– 281 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
The total budgetary revenue of the TAR Public Security Bureau for the 
year 2018 was RMB 240.8067 million, an increase of Yuan 32.2587 (15 per
cent) million over the 2017 budgetary revenue of Yuan 208.5480 million.
Out of RMB 240.8067 million, Yuan 8.1262 (3.43 per cent) was allocated 
as expenditures for projects in TAR, which was RMB 580,100 less than the 
RMB 8.7963 of 2017 for the same. The reduction from RMB 8.7963 (2017)
to RMB 8.1262 (2018) which equals Yuan 580,100 was reportedly due to the 
reduction of training fees for the civilian police officers.
The main reasons given for the increase in budgetary revenue and 
expenditure of financial appropriations are the increase in the salary of the
police, and the increase in personnel.The decrease in project funding compared 
to the previous year was reportedly due to the decrease in training fees for
public security department agencies.
Yuan 231.409 million was budgeted for administrative operations, Yuan
one million for general administrative affairs and Yuan 7.2162 million for other
public security expenditure. Administrative operations expenditure increased by
Yuan 31.8696 million over the Yuan 199.5394 million of 2017 due to increment 
of staff wages and increase in daily public funds.The budget allowed for general
administrative affairs was the same for 2018 as well i.e. Yuan one million. 
The basic public expenditure of the TAR Public Security Department for 
2018 totalled Yuan 231.409 million while the personnel budget was Yuan 
189.4067 million.The latter included basic wages, subsidy allowances, bonuses,
social security, other wage and welfare expenses, housing accumulation 
funds and subsidies for individuals and families. Yuan 42.0023 million was 
accounted for public expenditure which included printing fees, post and
telecommunications charges, travel expenses, conference fees, welfare fees,
daily maintenance fees, special materials and general equipment purchase fees,
office space utilities, office heating costs, and official use, vehicle maintenance 
costs and other expenses.
 Breakdown of the TAR Public Security Bureau Budget
Total Budget:Yuan 240.8067 [239.6252 General Public Budget Appropriation 
Revenue (99.51 per cent), 1.1815 (0.49 per cent) million carried over or 
balance from 2017]. 
– 282 – 
TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION’S EXPENDITURE ON PUBLIC SECURITY 
R5	 Administrative Operations (Public Security) amounted to Yuan 231.5006 
million, accounting for 96.13 per cent of the expenditure. 
R5 The General Administrative Affairs was Yuan one million, accounting for
0.41 per cent of the expenditure. 
R5 Other Public Security Expenditures comprised Yuan 8.3061 million,
accounting for 3.48 per cent of the expenditure. 
R5	 In 2018, the financial budget of the Public Security Bureau’s operating 
expenses was Yuan 42.0023 million, an increase of Yuan 7.2092 million 
compared to the Yuan 34.7931 million in 2017, or an increase of 20.72 
per cent.This was mainly due to the increase in personnel and the increase 
in the daily public budget. 
Government Procurement 
In 2018, the Public Security Department arranged a civilian government 
casualty insurance government procurement project with an amount of Yuan 
440,300, an increase of Yuan 13,700 compared to Yuan 426,600 for the civilian 
police casualty insurance budget in 2017, an increase of 3.21 per cent, mainly
due to the increase in personnel. 
Description of the Use of State-Owned Assets
As of the end of 2017, the Public Security Department had a total of 268 
vehicles. Among these were: one provincial level leader’s car, 48 general official 
vehicles, 18 general law enforcement duty vehicles, two special technical 
vehicles, and 199 other vehicles. In 2018, the Public Security Department did 
not allocate any budget for the purchase of vehicles in its departmental budget.
The available breakdown of the public security budgets of the six TAR 
Administrative Districts as discerned from a scrutiny of official media reports 
is as under. 
In Million USD/RMB
Lhasa PSB: US$ 133.12 (Yuan 894.441) in 2019.
Lhasa City PSB: US$ 17.95 (Yuan 120.606) in 2019. 
Shannan PSB: US$ 157.04 (Yuan 1,055.16) in 2019.
Nyingchi PSB: US$ 18.90 (Yuan 127.0157) in 2018. 
– 283 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Chamdo PSB: US$ 35.58 (Yuan 239.077) in 2018.
Shigatse PSB: US$ 173.27 (Yuan 1,164.235) in 2018 
Expenditure incurred on the large deployments of the People’s Armed 
Police Force (PAPF), now directly under the PLA, in the TAR is not included.
Expenditure on the continuous intensive campaigns in the TAR launched by
the TAR Communist Party’s United Front Department, including to win over 
Tibetan Buddhist monks and nuns, etc., is excluded from the TAR’s security
budget.Together, however, all these expenditures contribute to Beijing’s efforts 
at ‘stability maintenance’. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, March 
2020.) 
– 284 – 
45. China’s Xiaokang (Well-Off) Border Defence 
Villages in Tibet Autonomous Region 
Since the 19th Party Congress in October 2017, Chinese President Xi Jinping 
has signalled that extra attention would be paid by the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP) leadership to building a more comprehensive security structure 
in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR). The new architecture strengthens 
the present security apparatus already in place and combines it with Chinese 
President Xi Jinping’s new initiative of ‘model xiaokang (well-off ) border 
defence villages’. It is part of his nationwide push for poverty alleviation spelt 
out at the 19th Party Congress.The xiaokang (well-off ) border defence villages 
are also intended to create a buffer inhabited by people loyal to the CCP 
and the nation. They will act as watch posts along the border, help prevent 
infiltration by “pro-Dalai Lama elements” and “hostile forces”, facilitate the 
China-appointed Panchen Lama’s acceptance among Tibetans and position 
him for the traditional role of ‘tutor’ to the reincarnate Dalai Lama. The pace 
of these activities, along with China’s efforts to detect and weed out “doublefaced” officials in the TAR i.e. those professing loyalty to the Party and China 
while being secretly loyal to the Dalai Lama, has accelerated in the past couple 
of years.
Xi Jinping’s personal letter written on the eve of the 19th Party Congress 
to the two sisters resident in Yumei village in the TAR’s Nyingchi prefecture,
whose administrative boundaries in official Chinese maps include the Indian 
state of Arunachal Pradesh, initiated a new and important security programme 
centering on the borders. Since then, vast sums have been allotted for the 
development of so-called ‘model xiaokang (well-off ) border defence villages’
from the budgets of the TAR’s departments of public security, border defence,
poverty alleviation and civil affairs. Some 628 ‘model well-off border defence 
villages’ are under construction in 21 border counties along the TAR’s frontiers,
stretching from Ngari (Ali) district, across the Indian Union Territory of 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Ladakh, to Nyingchi (Linzhih) opposite India’s eastern province of Arunachal 
Pradesh. They are to be constructed within three years or by 2021.
Zhuangyan, Deputy Party Secretary, TAR Executive Chairman and
Chief Commander of the Construction Work Headquarters of Xiaokang
Villages, said in March 2018 that the aim of building the border villages is to
ensure consolidation of border areas and border security. It is to “align a high
sense of political responsibility and historical mission with the masses of the
border region” and the Party Committee. An article in China’s Agriculture 
Economics on December 18, 2017, gave details of the ‘model well-off border 
defence villages’. Describing Tibet as the “forefront of the national security
barrier and the Tibet border as the most impoverished area in China”, it
said that 628 ‘model well-off border defence villages’ are to be constructed
in 21 border counties along the TAR’s frontiers stretching from Ngari (Ali)
district across the Indian Union Territory of Ladakh to Nyingchi (Linzhih)
opposite India’s eastern province of Arunachal Pradesh within three years.
It disclosed that the original plan provided funds of Yuan 30.1 billion for
the ‘border well-off village’ and that the plans call for raising an additional
tens of billions of yuan to invest in construction of infrastructure such as
the road network, power grid and internet to ensure the economic growth
rate and per capita disposable income in the border areas. It disclosed too
that the status and salaries of these village-level cadres will be higher than 
the average level of those in other villages of the TAR. A villager in a model
xiaokang (well-off ) border defence village’ was quoted by the Tibet Daily as 
saying that he receives a border subsidy of Yuan 5,000 per year in addition to
an annual ecological subsidy of Yuan 8,871 annually and that, together with
all other subsidies, receives Yuan 30,000 each year! The article said Tibet’s
well-off border defence villages will involve 62,160 households with a total
of 240,000 people. They will be provided with ten amenities, namely, water,
electricity, road, communication, network (broadcasting network, postal
network and financial service network), teaching, science, literature, health
and insurance (social security, housing security). All well- off border villages
will be accessed by metalled roads.
The Tibet Autonomous Region Border Work Conference held on 
December 8,2017,resolved that by promoting poverty alleviation of the border 
– 286 – 
CHINA’S XIAOKANG (WELL-OFF) BORDER DEFENCE VILLAGES IN TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION 
people and closely ‘integrating guarding the border with a strong border’ by
2020, the rate of solving hardships of border towns and administrative villages
in Tibet will reach 95 per cent and 55 per cent respectively. It resolved too 
that by 2020, the per capita disposable income of the border people would be 
doubled from the current level and general farmers and herdsmen would have 
higher per capita incomes than others in the TAR.
These ‘model well off border defence villages’ appear to have been
selected for their remote location, very sparse population, potential location
for facilitating trans-border movement, and poor conditions. An important
role of the residents in these villages is to keep an eye on the movements of
the population and activities across the border. Populations in the ‘well-off 
border defence villages’ where local villagers presently number one or two
households, will be mixed, with the original number of households being
augmented by 15-20 additional households relocated from Tibetan villages
from other administrative districts of the TAR. The new ‘model well-off 
border defence villages’ being established are planned to finally comprise
approximately 20-30 households each with consequently enlarged village
land areas and attached grazing grounds. Each border defence village will
have at least a Party member, if not Party cadre, positioned in the village.
In addition to the passive security role assigned to them, official Chinese 
media reports disclose that these ‘well-off border defence villages’ have other 
roles as well.They are outposts for keeping a look-out for “secessionist”elements 
and countering infiltration attempts by “pro-Dalai Lama sympathisers and
elements”. The official media has indicated a psywar role, suggesting that the 
well-constructed houses, paved roads, electricity, TV and internet in these 
villages would be attractive to people living on the “other side” of the border.
Party officials posted in these villages would be able to do “political work”in the 
neighbouring area where people share customs, traditions and often ethnicity
with the Tibetan villagers. Related to this are the references since 2018 in 
China’s military literature to the expanded role of Political Commissars of 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) units, suggesting their tasking includes 
work across the border in areas of likely operations of PLA formations. It has 
been noticed, for example, that Party cadres and researchers have been doing
extensive work among the various tribes in Arunachal Pradesh. 
– 287 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Analysis of the Chinese media indicates that a total of 358 border defence 
villages have so far been constructed in four border areas in Nyingchi, Ngari,
Shigatse and Tsona.The following illustrate the nature of locations of some of 
the completed xiaokang border defence villages:
Nyingchi: Dekyi Dongsar village, Lilong town, Minling county;
Bamdrong village, Minling county; and a village in Buji town, Drakyab (Bayi) 
county.
Lhokha (Shannan): Ninety six xiaokang border defence villages have 
been built according to the Lhokha Municipality Development and Reform
Commission. Preparatory work on 40 has commenced and nine new projects
have been begun with an investment of Yuan 656 million. Work on the 
construction of eight xiaokang (well-off ) border defence villages (including
Gongzu and Sangyul villages) with an investment of Yuan 89 million has 
begun in Lhodrak county. Lhokha has allotted Yuan 1.32 billion for the 
construction of the xiaokang (well-off ) border defence villages.
Tsona: Lhuntse county has rebuilt one village and started construction of 
four new xiaokang (well-off ) border defence villages, including Zhongna and
Samba Star villages, with an investment of Yuan 120 million. One hundred 
and ninety-six members of 56 families would move to their new houses on 
the National Day on October 1, 2019, in Yulmai village. In Langkazi county,
construction is underway on six villages with an investment of Yuan 107 
million. In Tsona county, construction of two villages has resumed and work
on three new villages (Quna, Khatak and Yama Rong) has started at a total 
cost of Yuan 340 million. Ma Ma Monpa Nationality Township in Tsona,
referred to as “southern Tibet” in the Chinese media, appears to be getting
special attention. The Director of the Lhokha Propaganda Department said 
the Ma Ma Nationality Township is being given Yuan 88.58 million in funds 
by “aid Tibet”, Lhokha and Tsona county for the xiaokang well-off border 
defence village. Forty households will be relocated to 62 new houses and 15 
houses will be reconstructed. A hotel is also being built and is estimated to 
yield Yuan 40,000 annually in tourist income.
Shigatse: Model xiaokang (well off ) border defence villages are being
built in Yadong (Dromo), Zhongba, Saga and 9 other counties. 
– 288 – 
CHINA’S XIAOKANG (WELL-OFF) BORDER DEFENCE VILLAGES IN TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION 
Ngari (Ali): a total of 37 ‘xiaokang’ (well off ) border defence villages are 
underway in the counties of Muir, Puland, Rito and Zanda in addition to the 
construction in 32 ‘front- line’ villages and five ‘second-line’ villages. The total 
investment is Yuan 2.14 billion and 21,353 people will be settled.
The sites of some of the border defence villages are illustrative.The village
of Men Chu Ma, for example, in Lhakang township, Lhodrak county, Shannan 
(Lhoka) district of the TAR is in a disputed area between China and Bhutan,
on the border with Bhutan. In Bhutan, it is under the Kurtoe Lhuntse district. 
In the past two years, the Men Chu Ma border defence village has expanded
from two households to almost 20 households, with the village head asserting
that they can now use their “traditional” grazing grounds which they have 
till now been unable to and which are said to lie in Bhutan! Similarly, there 
is little doubt that gradually taking advantage of the thinning population in
the border areas and villages on the Indian side, these newly settled villages
on the Chinese side could ‘nibble’ and occupy Indian territories with minimal 
chances of detection. 
Construction of these xiaokang border defence villages’, which will 
augment the security measures already in place in the TAR, has probably been
accelerated since the beginning of this year.It was in January 2019 that Chinese
President Xi Jinping warned cadres that “hostile foreign powers” are trying 
to provoke a “colour revolution” in China. The ongoing trouble in the Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) will be seen as confirmation 
of the apprehensions of China’s senior leadership. The Chinese authorities 
will consequently pay attention to Tibet’s border with Nepal where, on the 
Nepalese side, people of Tibetan origin reside. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 16, 2019.) 
– 289 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Appendix
 
Illustrative List of Border Well-Off Villages In Tibet Autonomous 
Region 
A) Lhokha City ኡইᐲ
— Tsona County 䭉䛓৯
1) Quna Village, 䭉䛓৯ᴢ᤯ᶁ
2) Yama Rong Village, 䭉䛓৯ӊ⧋㦓ᶁ
3) Khatak Village, 䭉䛓৯঑䗮ᶁ
— Lhodrak County ⍋᡾৯
 
1) Lhakhang Township,
⍋᡾৯᣹ᓧ䭷
2) Gongzu Village,
⍋᡾৯䍑⾆ᶁ
3) Sangyul Village, ⍋᡾৯ẁ⦹ᶁ
 
4) Lagyab Township,
⍋᡾৯᣹䛺ґ᣹䛺ᶁ
— Lhuntse County 䲶ᆀ৯
1) Zhongna Village, 䲶ᆀ৯Ԣ䛓ᶁ
2) Yulmai Border Well-off Village 䲶ᆀ৯⦹哖ሿᓧ⽪㤳ґ
3) Dakri Township 䲶ᆀ৯᡾ᰕґ
4) Douyu Lopa Township 䲶ᆀ৯ᯇ⦹⨎ᐤ≁᯿ґ
5) Sanlin Township 䲶ᆀ৯
B) Shigatse City ᰕரࡉᐲ
— Dromo County (Yadong) 
1) Guru Village , ӊь৯ਔྲᶁ
— Gampa County 
1) Jiru Village, ዇ᐤ৯ਹ⊍ᶁ
Ngari Prefecture 䱯䟼ൠ४
1) Jagang Village, Risom Township, Ruthok County, 䱯䟼ൠ४ᰕ൏৯ᰕᶮґ⭢዇ᶁ
Nyingchi City ᷇㣍ᐲ
— Metok County 
1) Dhamo Village, Lopa Ethnic Township, ໘㝡৯䗮ᵘ⨎ᐤ≁᯿ґ䗮ᵘᶁ
2) Guthang Township, ໘㝡৯Ṭᖃґ
—Minling County ㊣᷇৯
1) Dekyi New Village, Lilong Township ㊣᷇৯䟼嗉ґᗧਹᯠᶁ
– 290 – 
46. China and US Could Emerge as Adversaries 
over the Tibet Issue 
China’s Communist authorities appear to have reached the conclusion 
approximately 18 months ago that the time for selecting the reincarnation of 
the 14th Dalai Lama is drawing near. Since then, they have stepped up efforts 
to capture the hearts and minds of the Tibetan people and adapt Tibetan 
Buddhism to “socialism with Chinese characteristics”. China’s official media 
has recently begun to often refer to “Chinese Buddhism”! Blatant indication 
of the effort to project Buddhism as Chinese is the article authored by the 
Chinese Ambassador to India Sun Weidong and published in an Indian 
newspaper in November last year. The article claimed that “Buddhism was 
introduced into Tibet from the Tang Empire” completely ignoring that Padma 
Sambhava and numerous other sages had travelled from India to Tibet and 
China carrying Buddhist religious texts.
Beijing’s central objectives are to undermine the influence that the 14th
Dalai Lama wields over Tibetans inside China and around the world and ensure 
that they accept the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama who will be selected by the
Chinese Communist regime. This is essential for Beijing to legitimise and secure
its hold over Tibet. The Dalai Lama has, meanwhile, declared he will live till he 
is at least 113 years old and made explicit that his reincarnation will not be found
within the jurisdiction of an authoritarian regime and, specifically, China. He has,
additionally, raised doubts as to whether he will be “reincarnated” or opt for the
procedure that allows him to select an “emanation”. Beijing has since then insisted
that the next Dalai Lama must be reincarnated! 
An equally important objective for Beijing is dissipating the anti-Chinese, or
more specifically the anti-Chinese Communist Party (CCP), sentiment among
the Tibetan Buddhist monks and nuns. In addition to persuading them to adapt
the teachings of Tibetan Buddhism to “socialism with Chinese characteristics”,
they are simultaneously being given “patriotic education” to make them loyal to
the Communist regime in Beijing.The efforts have accelerated over the past year 
 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and coincide with the CCP’s effort to promote acceptance among Tibetans and
Buddhists worldwide of Gyaltsen Norbu, appointed by the Chinese in 1995 as
the legitimate Panchen Lama. The Chinese-appointed Panchen Lama’s initial 
brief visits to Tibet, interspersed with long intervals have, since last year, yielded
to him staying for extended periods in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR).
More importantly, he has, for the first time, begun venturing outside Shigatse
and travelling to other places and regions in the TAR like the Labrang Tashikhyil
monastery in the Labrang area of eastern Tibet (Amdo), Nyingchi, opposite the
Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, and Ngari (Ali), opposite India’s Ladakh.The 
aim is to have him accepted as the second highest-ranking religious personage
in the gelug school of Tibetan Buddhists and facilitate his assumption at the
appropriate time of the traditional historical role as the reincarnate Dalai Lama’s 
Tutor. 
Other measures are also being implemented. Beijing has directed the Police
Headquarters in the TAR to launch a new propaganda campaign entitled “One
Million Policemen into Ten Million Homes”ostensibly to maintain ‘zero distance’ 
between the police and the people.The year-long campaign, launched on January
14 and scheduled to end by December 2020, envisages grassroot civilian police
units entering all aspects of a community, including pastoral areas, monasteries,
nunneries, campuses, markets, construction sites, homes, and border areas to
‘mingle’ closely with the common people. Township police units have been asked 
to enter virtual WeChat groups. On receipt of these instructions, policemen have
started visiting families and giving them edible oil, rice, flour, vegetables, etc. This
is in addition to the policy of deploying one Party cadre in each village in the TAR.
Similarly, the TAR People Congress decided in late January this year to 
establish a ‘National Unity Affairs Office’ in the TAR.This requires all levels of 
government, companies, community organisations, villages, schools, military 
groups and religious activity centres to work on ethnic unity and “integrate
ethnic unity” into their culture. Monks and nuns have been asked to treat 
“national unity” as their personal objective and contribute to “maintaining
harmony and stability in the religious field.” The measures augment other
efforts already underway to control monasteries and nunneries through
“model patriotic” monks and a cadre of “monastic monks” who supervise and 
administer monasteries. 
– 292 – 
CHINA AND US COULD EMERGE AS ADVERSARIES OVER THE TIBET ISSUE 
Threatening to upset China’s plans is the ‘Tibet Policy and Support Act’
passed by the US House of Representatives on January 28 with a landslide
majority of 392-22, amending the Act of 2002. Since the Tibet issue has 
wide bipartisan support, the bill is likely to soon be passed by the Senate and 
will then be forwarded for the US President’s signature. The amended ‘Tibet 
Policy and Support Act’ is more direct in its support for the Dalai Lama and 
incorporates potential punitive measures.
Especially important are its recommendations that the Chinese
authorities resume talks with the Dalai Lama or his representatives
or democratically-elected leaders of the Tibetan community without
preconditions; provision for sanctions against Chinese officials who interfere
in the ‘reincarnation’ process of the next Dalai Lama; and visa sanctions,
freezing of US assets of those sanctioned and suspension of business
transactions between the Chinese officials and US citizens and companies.
It additionally opposes any effort by Chinese authorities to identify, select,
educate or install Tibetan Buddhist religious leaders, including any future
Dalai Lama, in a manner inconsistent with the Tibetan Buddhist faith and 
community. It adds too that the US Administration should not authorise
China to establish any additional Consulate in the US till a US Consulate
is established in Lhasa. These new recommendations seek to pressure China
into changing its policy on Tibet. 
China’s consistent position has been that the negotiations are intended 
only to address the Dalai Lama’s personal concerns and are not with the 
Tibetan administration-in-exile.Talks have, therefore, been thus far restricted 
to between the Dalai Lama’s envoys and representatives of the CCP Central 
Committee’s United Front Work Department (UFWD). It has consequently
declined to entertain “democratically-elected leaders of the Tibetan 
community”. The reference to “without preconditions” points to the US
Congress wanting to broaden the scope of discussions to include discussion of 
issues also in the post- 14th Dalai Lama period.
The proposed sanctions give teeth to the Act. Though China’s official 
Global Times newspaper quoted Diao Daming, Associate Professor at China’s
Renmin University, as saying this “long-arm jurisdiction”actually has a limited 
impact on Chinese officials, the newspaper ignored that many Chinese cadres 
– 293 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
travel to the US, have relatives residing abroad and children studying in US
colleges. They could all potentially be adversely impacted.
The visa sanctions have a precedent. In 2013, Spain’s National Court had 
issued an arrest warrant against five former Chinese leaders, including former
Chinese President Jiang Zemin, former Prime Minister Li Peng and Chinese
President Hu Jintao on charges of “genocide” in Tibet. The case against them
was brought by human rights groups under Spain’s ‘recognition of universal
jurisdiction’—the principle that crimes against humanity can be prosecuted across
borders. Before the subject came up for trial, Spain’s National Court, reportedly
under pressure from China in 2014, introduced changes in the Spanish law. The
amendment restricted Spanish judges to only investigate crimes of genocide and
crimes against humanity if those indicted were Spanish citizens or foreigners who
had their habitual residence in Spain at the time when the crimes were committed.
The US Congress also authorised grants from 2021 till 2025 totalling over 
US$ 9 million to the Tibetan administration-in-exile,Tibetan communities in 
India, Nepal and the TAR as well as to Radio Free Asia and Voice of America.
While the amount is the same as last year, it confirms continuing US support 
to the Tibetans and this financial support will cause discomfort to the Chinese 
authorities. 
The bill passed by the US House of Representatives bolsters the Dalai Lama’s 
negotiating position with the Chinese. Once signed by the US President it will 
give an additional lever to the US. Interesting around this time is the 16-point
Joint Press Statement issued at the end of Chinese President Xi Jinping’s visit 
to Myanmar on January 18. It declared, “The Myanmar side reiterates its firm
commitment to the One China Policy and supports the efforts of China to resolve
the issues of Taiwan, Tibet and Xinjiang, which are inalienable parts of China”,
possibly hinting that the Tibet issue remains unresolved! Xi Jinping’s warning in
Kathmandu last October that “anyone attempting to split China in any part of the
country will end in crushed bodies and shuttered bones...And any external forces
backing such attempts dividing China will be deemed by the Chinese people as
pipe-dreaming!” now assumes more relevance. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on March 
6, 2020.) 
– 294 – 
47. China’s Seventh Tibet Work Forum, 
August 29-30, 2020 
The Seventh Tibet Work Forum was held in Beijing on August 29-30,
2020. The Forum heralds a tougher regime for Tibetans in China, where the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) will penetrate into each village and hamlet 
in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR). There will be renewed emphasis on 
adapting Tibetan Buddhism to ‘socialism with Chinese characteristics’ and 
countering ‘separatism’ and the ‘Dalai clique’.
The entire Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) including Li Zhanshu,
Wang Huning, Zhao Leji and Han Zheng attended the Forum. Chinese 
Premier Li Keqiang presided over the Forum. Chinese People’s Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC) Chairman and PBSC member Wang 
Yang summed up the proceedings. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang described Xi 
Jinping’s speech at the Forum as “a guiding document on Tibet-related work
in a new era”. 
Though held at irregular intervals, the Tibet Work Forums are important 
meetings where the CCP’s top leadership reviews past plans and performance 
of the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) Party and government, and sets out 
and approves long-term development and security plans for the TAR. The 
Tibet Work Forums have been held in 1980; 1984; 1994; 2001; 2010; 2015 
and 2020. This is the second Tibet Work Forum in Xi Jinping’s term. 
Around 300 persons normally attend the Tibet Work Forums. Official 
Chinese media reports said that among those attending the Seventh Tibet 
Work Conference “were TAR Party and government officials, the ‘principal 
comrades’ in charge of the Party and governments of various cities and 
provinces, officials in charge of the Party and government of Sichuan,
Yunnan, Gansu, and Qinghai provinces and principal officials of the Party 
and governments of the Tibetan Autonomous Prefectures”. Also attending 
would have been members of the CPPCC, responsible officers of relevant 
military units, financial institutions, State-owned Enterprises (SoEs) and 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
retired officials with experience of Tibetan affairs. Former Chinese President 
Hu Jintao, who has served as TAR Party Secretary, might have been invited.
Curious this time, though, is that the official Chinese media did not 
specifically mention Wu Yingjie’s presence at the Tibet Work Forum, although 
reports reveal that he, along with TAR Chairman Che Dalha (Qizhala), was in 
Beijing from August 28–30. On August 29 afternoon, Wu Yingjie signed an 
agreement at the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security for the
establishment of a Technicians Centre in Lhasa. 
During the Forum, the 11th Panchen Lama Gyaltsen Norbu was in 
Medog County from August 29 to 31.The coverage of the state-owned China 
Central Television (CCTV), China Global Television (CGTV) and Xizang
TV of the Tibet Work Forum did not show the presence of Tibetan monks or 
persons in traditional Tibetan dress.
Speaking at the two-day seventh central Tibet Work Forum, Chinese 
President Xi Jinping delivered an “important” speech wherein he called for 
efforts to build a new, modern, socialist Tibet. He underlined the need to 
fully implement the CCP’s policies on governing Tibet for a new era and 
called for “efforts to ensure national security and enduring peace and stability,
steadily improve people’s lives, maintain a good environment, solidify border 
defense and ensure frontier security”. He said, “Efforts must be made to build 
a new modern socialist Tibet that is united, prosperous, culturally advanced, 
harmonious and beautiful”. Xi Jinping recounted that since the Sixth Forum 
in 2015, Tibet has made comprehensive progress and “historic” achievements 
in its various undertakings. It had achieved sustained stability and rapid
development in Tibet, making a major contribution to the overall work of the 
Party and the state. He said since the 18th Party Congress in 2012, policies 
on governing Tibet for a new era have taken shape. He stressed that the 
CCP leadership, the system of socialism with Chinese characteristics and the 
system of regional ethnic autonomy must be upheld to carry out work related 
to Tibet. 
Xi Jinping asserted that work related to Tibet must focus on safeguarding
national unity and strengthening ethnic solidarity. More education and 
guidance should be provided for the public to mobilise their participation in
combating separatist activities, thus forging an “ironclad shield” to safeguard 
– 296 – 
CHINA’S SEVENTH TIBET WORK FORUM, AUGUST 29-30, 2020 
stability. Xi Jinping stressed that patriotism should be incorporated into the
whole process of education in all schools and called for “continuous efforts to 
enhance recognition of the great motherland, the Chinese nation, the Chinese 
culture, the CCP and socialism with Chinese characteristics by people of all
ethnic groups”.He observed,“Tibetan Buddhism should be guided in adapting
to the socialist society and should be developed in the Chinese context”.
Xi Jinping stressed the need for more work and said measures and support 
are needed to consolidate the achievements made in poverty alleviation. He 
said a number of major infrastructure projects and public service facilities 
will be completed, including the Sichuan Tibet Railway. Touching on the
importance of the environment, Xi Jinping stressed the importance of further 
scientific research on the Tibetan plateau. He described conserving the ecology
of the Qinghai-Tibet plateau as the greatest contribution to the survival and 
development of the Chinese nation.
Commenting on building the Party in Tibet, Xi Jinping instructed that 
there is need to strengthen the building of leadership teams at all levels, cadre 
teams and primary-level Party organisations in order to “improve the capacity 
to respond to major struggles and prevent major risks”. Cadres and workers 
in Tibet should be cared for, and support policies regarding their income,
housing, medical care and retirement, as well as education for their children,
should be further improved and well implemented. He emphasised long-term 
commitment to the policy of the CCP Central Committee (CC) to ensure 
Tibet has support from the central authorities and assistance from the whole 
country, adding that continued and increasing support will be offered to 
Sichuan, Yunnan, Gansu and Qinghai provinces in their Tibet-related work.
A day prior to start of the Forum (August 28), the CCP mouthpiece
People’s Daily front-paged an article under the caption: “The Party Central
Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at the Core is Concerned About the
Work in Tibet”. It summarised Tibet-related work done by Xi Jinping and
the CCP CC since the 18th Party Congress. Noting that work concerning
Tibet has been a major focus of the Party leadership since its “liberation”
nearly 70 years ago, it also said that “since the 18th Party Congress, the
Central Committee, with Comrade Xi Jinping at the core, has focused on
achieving a moderately prosperous society and modernizing Tibet together 
– 297 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
with the whole country and thrown a great amount of [their] heart’s blood 
into developing snow-covered plateaus for a new era.”The article primarily
focussed on the CCP CC’s contributions such as “Xi’s Important Discourse
on Governing the Frontier, Stabilizing Tibet.”The front-page article listed
instances showing Xi Jinping’s concern for the welfare of the people of
Tibet and observed that he had visited Tibet as early as June 1998, for
investigation of the work of the counterpart assistance mission in Fujian
and in July 2011, had attended the celebration of the 60th anniversary of
Tibet’s peaceful liberation as head of the central delegation. It concluded
that “the people who live on this ancient and magical land believe firmly:
tomorrow certainly will be even finer!”
The article cited examples of how economic prosperity in Tibet’s villages
had increased as had schools and the standards of education. It asserted that 
“as an important frontier ethnic region in China, Tibet is located in the 
border areas. Due to the high cold and lack of oxygen, the task of fighting
against separatism is arduous”. It stated, “Tibet has entered a critical stage
of making every effort to build a well-off society in an all-round way and
long-term stability. Maintaining Tibet’s harmony and stability and realizing
Tibet’s prosperity and progress are the ardent expectations of the cadres and 
the masses of all ethnic groups in Tibet, as well as the common wish of the 
entire Party and people of all ethnic groups in the country. General Secretary 
Xi Jinping has profound thoughts on how to govern Tibet in the new era, to 
further promote Tibet’s long-term development and long-term stability, and 
to realize the yearning of the people of all ethnic groups in Tibet for a better 
life”. It emphasised, “To govern the country, we must govern the border, and 
we must first stabilize the Tibet.”
 Focussing on Party-building the People’s Daily article stated, “It is 
necessary to fully and correctly implement the Party’s ethnic and religious
policies, strengthen national unity, and continuously increase the recognition
of the people of all ethnic groups with the great motherland, the Chinese 
nation, Chinese culture, the Communist Party of China, and socialism with 
Chinese characteristics”. It added, “The central government’s concern and 
national support must be closely integrated with the hard work of the cadres 
and masses of all ethnic groups in Tibet, and the work in Tibet must be done 
– 298 – 
CHINA’S SEVENTH TIBET WORK FORUM, AUGUST 29-30, 2020 
well in the overall planning of domestic and international issues; and it is 
necessary to strengthen the building of Party organizations and cadres at all 
levels to consolidate the Party’s foundation for governance in Tibet”.
The state-owned CCTV in its 8 pm “Focus” programme on August 31,
said that at the Seventh Tibet Work Forum Xi Jinping had evaluated there
had been “all-round progress, historic achievement” in Tibet since the Sixth
Tibet Work Forum. He said that under the strong leadership of the Party
Central Committee and with the strong support of the people of the whole
country, the cadres and masses of all ethnic groups in Tibet have united and
worked hard, and solved many long-term problems that they had wanted
to solve but had been unable to. CCTV said that the “five years since the
Sixth Central Tibet Work Forum have been an extraordinary five years in
the history of Tibet’s development” adding that this was because the Party
Central Committee has always attached great importance to work in Tibet.
It said that since the 18th Party Congress, after summing up the successful
experience of the Party leading the people in governing, stabilising, and
rejuvenating Tibet, the Party’s strategy for governing Tibet has been formed 
in the new era. 
It highlighted that at the Seventh Tibet Work Symposium, Xi Jinping
had explained the Party’s strategy for ‘governing Tibet in the new era’ with 
the Ten “Musts”: (i) We must uphold the leadership of the Communist Party 
of China, the socialist system with Chinese characteristics, and the system of 
regional ethnic autonomy. (ii) We must adhere to the strategic thinking of 
governing the country and governing the border, and stabilising Tibet first.
(iii) Maintaining the unification of the motherland and strengthening national
unity must be the focus, and the focus of Tibet’s work. (iv) We must adhere 
to the important principles of governing Tibet according to the law, enriching
the people and rejuvenating Tibet, building Tibet for a long time, uniting
people’s hearts, and laying a solid foundation. (v) The overall domestic and 
international situation must be coordinated. (vi) Improving people’s livelihood 
and uniting people’s hearts must be taken as the starting point and goal of
economic and social development. (vii) We must promote the exchanges and
integration of all ethnic groups. (viii) We must adhere to the direction of the 
Sinicisation of religion in China and manage religious affairs in accordance 
– 299 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
with the law. (ix) We must insist on ecological protection first. (x) We must 
strengthen Party building, especially political building.
Xi Jinping had expounded the Party’s strategy for governing Tibet at the 
Sixth Central Tibet Work Symposium in August 2015, and put forward the 
“Six Musts”. China’s official media described the progression from the “Six 
Musts”to the “Ten Musts”as indicating a “more comprehensive and profound”
exposition of the Tibet strategy.
Within days of the conclusion of the Seventh Tibet Work Forum on 
September 4, retired People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Maj Gen Cheng
Xizhong, who as Senior Colonel was posted as Defence Attache to India and
later in 2014 to Nepal and is now Distinguished Professor of the Southwest 
University of Political Science and Law, wrote an article on the Tibet Work
Forum in the China Tibetology Research Centre’s magazine China-Tibet Net. 
Describing Xi Jinping’s speech at the Forum as “important”, he highlighted
that the “Ten Musts” summarise the Party’s strategy for governing Tibet in 
the new era. Mentioning that he had worked in South Asia, including India
and Nepal for 20 years, he said that while in Nepal, “I deeply felt that Tibet’s
stability and development are of great significance to the security and stability
of our surrounding areas and to the long-term stability of our country”.
Maj Gen Cheng Xizhong noted that by December 2019, all 74 povertystricken counties (districts) in Tibet had achieved remarkable results in 
poverty alleviation. Citing Milin county, Nyingchi city, as an example, he said 
currently 67 villages had achieved 100 per cent coverage of electricity, roads,
communications, and networks.The Tibetan Buddhist community had “shown 
a strong sense of social responsibility and mission” and worked with other 
sections of society in prevention and control of the epidemic thus embodying
“patriotism, protection of the country, obedience to the overall situation, and 
mutual assistance”. He said this reflected the current social status, ethnic unity
and religious harmony in Tibet.
Observing that Xi Jinping had emphasised the necessity of promoting the 
construction of a number of major infrastructure and public service facilities,
he referred to the 1,742.39-km-long Sichuan-Tibet railway presently under 
construction with an investment of more than Yuan 300 billion. Describing
it as an “unprecedented project of the century”, he said that once completed, 
– 300 – 
CHINA’S SEVENTH TIBET WORK FORUM, AUGUST 29-30, 2020 
railway travel time from Chengdu to Lhasa will be reduced from 36 to about 12 
hours.This is the second railway to Tibet after the Qinghai Tibet Railway and
meets not only the expectations of the Tibetan people, but also the aspirations
of the people of the whole country. He noted that it is of great significance for 
the development and construction of the frontier and ecological protection 
and especially for the stability of the frontier region and the maintenance of 
national security. Tibet, he said, is gradually improving the construction of a 
“two vertical and two horizontal” railway networks.
He sought to publicise the benefits of Chinese assistance to Nepal, calling
it “a huge centripetal force for neighboring countries and the vast number 
of overseas Chinese”. He recounted that a number of Nepal Army officers
visiting China in recent years had remarked that Kathmandu and Lhasa had 
witnessed transformational changes in the past ten years! In a transparent 
reference to Tibetans abroad, he added that while he was working in India
and Nepal, many “friendly overseas Chinese” had appealed to him saying,“We
were tricked out of the country when we were young and wandered abroad for 
so many years. Now that we have grown up, we especially miss our parents and 
brothers and sisters. We want to go home.”
Another article by Lian Xiangmin, Deputy Director General and 
Researcher of the China Tibetology Research Centre, was also published by
China-Tibet Net on September 4. Saying that Xi Jinping’s “important” speech 
was of “a strong political, ideological, and theoretical nature”, he called it “a
programmatic document that guides Tibet work in the new era”. Recounting
the evolution of the Tibet Work Forums, Lian Xiangmin said they are of 
“great significance as a link between the past and the next” and have integrated
“the guiding ideology and governance strategy.” He said that the Forums have 
generated a number of innovative results and greatly improved theory. He 
observed that many things never change, like “maintaining the unification of 
the motherland and strengthening ethnic unity” and “upholding the Party’s 
leadership”.
Lian Xiangmin emphasised that to promote the rapid development
and long-term stability of Tibet and realise the aspirations of people of all
ethnic groups in Tibet for a better life, the most essential feature comprises 
the leadership of the Communist Party of China, and the greatest advantage 
– 301 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
of the socialist system with Chinese characteristics is the leadership of the
Communist Party of China. He asserted, “Our Party plays the role of the 
decision-making core and command center for various undertakings … and 
all policies related to the overall development of the Party and the country are 
under the overall planning of the Party Central Committee” He urged Party
organisations at all levels, localities and departments to fully implement the 
party’s strategy for governing Tibet in the new era.
Within days of the Tibet Work Forum, the TAR authorities began
disseminating the “spirit” of CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping’s “important”
speech and the message of the Forum. The TAR’S National Security Council
(NSC), for example, held a meeting to implement the “spirit” of the Tibet 
Work Forum. Separately, the TAR Party Committee convened a meeting on
September 4, where TAR Party Secretary Wu Yingjie said the Tibet Work
Forum demonstrated the “strategic importance of Tibet” and that it had 
approved a “blueprint for a new socialist modernisation of Tibet”. More such 
meetings were expected to be held across the TAR.
Xi Jinping’s speech indicates that a tougher new regime will be imposed
in the TAR. The emphasis will be on Party building and inducting more 
Tibetans in the CCP to expand its reach. A pronounced uptick in efforts to 
‘educate’monks and nuns to become ‘patriotic’and adapt Tibetan Buddhism to 
‘socialism with Chinese characteristics’ can be anticipated. ‘Patriotic education’ 
in schools and campaigns against ‘separatism’ and countering the influence of
the Dalai Lama will intensify. Dual-use infrastructure connectivity projects
will be accelerated. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 2020.) 
– 302 – 
48. China’s Third Central Xinjiang Work 
Conference 
On the eve of the 65th anniversary of the establishment of the XinjiangUyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR) and after an interval of six years, the 
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) held its Third Central Xinjiang Work
Symposium in Beijing on September 25-26, 2020. The conference was held 
in the midst of negative international media attention, which highlighted the 
instances of discrimination and reported incarceration of millions of Uyghurs 
in ‘reeducation’ or ‘vocational’ centres constructed across the XUAR. Earlier, 
in a bid to address international concerns, China’s State Council had issued a 
White Paper on Xinjiang on September 16.
As per past practice, the entire CCP Central Committee (CC) Politburo 
Standing Committee (PBSC), Politburo, Secretary of the CCP CC Secretariat,
leading comrades of the National People’s Congress (NPC) Standing 
Committee, State Councillors, President of the Supreme People’s Court, Chief 
Prosecutor of the Supreme People’s Procuratorate and leading comrades of 
the CPPCC attended the conference. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang presided 
and CPPCC Chairman Wang Yang summed up the proceedings. Chinese 
President Xi Jinping made an “important” speech which set out the long-term 
policies for Xinjiang. Prominent were the emphasis on “unity” and “stability”,
the change in tasks for the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps 
(XPCC or Bingtuan), and the sharp increase in Xinjiang’s security budget.
Xi Jinping’s speech was reported by Xinhua on September 26. In his 
speech, Xi Jinping observed that there had been steady improvement in 
Xinjiang’s economic development between 2014 to 2019, with a sound 
economic momentum and an average annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
growth rate of 7.2 per cent. The people’s living standards had improved 
significantly with an average annual 9.1 per cent growth in residential per 
capita disposable income, and more than 2.92 million out of 3.09 million 
people had been lifted out of poverty. More than 10 million people moved to 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
new homes and the social security system and basic public services in urban,
rural and pastoral areas had become better with free health check-ups for all
people. The ‘standardization’ rate of township hospitals and village clinics had 
reached 100 per cent, with 99.7 per cent of the residents being covered by
basic medical insurance. 
Stating that support from the central government and assistance from 
other provinces to Xinjiang were continuously increasing, Xi Jinping disclosed 
that from 2014 to 2019, the central government’s transfer payments to the 
Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous Region and the Xinjiang Production and 
Construction Corps (XPCC or ‘Bingtuan’) increased from Yuan 263.69 
billion (US$ 38.64 billion) to Yuan 422.48 billion (US$ 61.90 billion), an 
average annual increase of 10.4 per cent. In other words, during these six years,
a sum of more than Yuan 2 trillion (US$ 0.29 trillion) in total was channelled
into Xinjiang. Xi Jinping said that the 19 ‘Aid-Xinjiang’ provinces and cities 
had strengthened all-round counterpart support, invested a total of Yuan 
96.4 billion (US$ 14.12 billion) in aid to Xinjiang (including the XPCC),
implemented more than 10,000 aid projects in Xinjiang, given over Yuan 
1.684 billion (US$ 0.25 billion) as aid to Xinjiang enterprises, and central 
enterprises had invested an additional over Yuan 700 billion (US$ 102.56
billion).
Xi Jinping expressed satisfaction that “on the whole, Xinjiang social 
stability is good and people are working in peace and contentment, laying
a solid foundation for long-term stability”. He attributed this to the “Party’s
policies on Xinjiang in the new era”, which were developed by the 18th CCP 
CC and “must be adhered to on a long-term basis”. He stressed the need to 
heighten a sense of identity of the Chinese nation to constantly strengthen
ethnic unity and suggested that “education on the sense of Chinese identity
should be incorporated into the education of officials and the younger
generation in Xinjiang” to let the “sense of Chinese identity take root in 
people”.
Noting that development is important for lasting peace and stability in
Xinjiang, Xi Jinping stressed that the region’s geographical advantages should
be leveraged to develop Xinjiang as the centre of the ‘Silk Road Economic 
Belt’ and a hub of opening up for the inland and border areas. In this context, 
– 304 – 
CHINA’S THIRD CENTRAL XINJIANG WORK CONFERENCE 
he called for efforts for increasing the efficiency of the industrial sector and 
boosting urbanisation in Xinjiang while protecting the environment. Xi 
Jinping stressed on the “Six Stabilities” (employment, financial sector, foreign
trade, foreign investment, domestic investment, and expectations) and the “Six 
Guarantees”(job security, basic living needs, operations of market entities, food 
and energy, stable industrial and supply chains, and the normal functioning
of primary-level governments). He called for unremitting efforts to eradicate 
poverty and promote employment.
There was considerable emphasis on the need for ensuring the loyalty
of cadres and the Party’s role. While Xi Jinping did say that “cadres of all 
ethnic groups in Xinjiang are trustworthy and capable of fighting”, he also 
said that “they should be politically motivated” and that “it is necessary to 
promote the national spirit” and “firmly establish a national ideology” which 
encourages “cadres at all levels to take root in the border and contribute to the 
border in the new era”. He described doing a good job in Xinjiang as a major
achievement for the whole Party and the country.
The leadership of the Party was highlighted and the Central Xinjiang
Work Coordination Group was instructed to strengthen its work at the
grassroots and “put forward work opinions on major issues” under the
leadership of the Party Central Committee. The Xinjiang Autonomous
Region Party Committee, Xi Jinping said,“is on the front line and must fulfil 
its main responsibilities and implement its work well”. He also called on all
provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities in the interior of China
to do a good job in Xinjiang related work, strengthen coordination and
cooperation and support Xinjiang’s stability and development. Importantly,
he called for “the building of stability maintenance capabilities”—an
euphemism for the state security apparatus—and enhancement of the
organisational advantages and mobilisation capabilities of the Xinjiang
Production and Construction Corps so that it could “better play its special
role”. 
In his speech,Chinese Premier Li Keqiang said that Xi Jinping’s“important 
speech comprehensively summarized the major achievements of Xinjiang 
work” and clarified the policies and strategic measures for promoting social
stability and long-term stability in Xinjiang. He observed that it had a strong 
– 305 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
political, ideological and theoretical nature and that Xinjiang’s work must be 
“guided by Xi Jinping’s thoughts on socialism with Chinese characteristics 
in the new era, strengthen the ‘Four Consciousnesses’, strengthen the ‘Four 
Confidences’, and achieve the ‘Two Safeguards’”.
Concluding the symposium, CPPCC Chairman Wang Yang described 
Xi Jinping’s “important speech” as “profound in thought, and rich in content”
and a “programmatic document guiding Xinjiang work in the new era and a 
powerful ideological weapon”. He too stressed the need to “focus on deepseated issues related to long-term stability” and the necessity of strengthening
organisational leadership and coordination, carrying out a variety of publicity
activities and penetrating the grassroots to get deeply rooted in the hearts of 
the people.
The US-based China-owned Duowei news outlet gave an interesting
insight into the sharp rise in China’s expenditure on security in the XinjiangUyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR). Claiming that it had been tracking 
security expenditure for some years, it said the expenditure on public security
in Xinjiang increased significantly after 2014, from Yuan 22.22 billion in 
2014 to Yuan 57.95 billion in 2017, a cumulative increase of 161 per cent,
especially in 2017 compared to 2016. Stating that an increase of 92.6 per cent 
was surprising, it suggested that a considerable part may perhaps be used for
the operation of the reeducation conversion training centres. 
A People’s Daily article (September 30) on the Xinjiang conference 
publicised that Xi Jinping’s speech had been widely welcomed throughout
Xinjiang. Interesting were the remarks by Qi Xinping, Secretary of the Party
Committee of the 6th Division of the Xinjiang Production and Construction 
Corps (XPCC) in Wujiaqu city of Xinjiang, which confirmed that the XPCC 
had been assigned an additional new role, which explained Xi Jinping’s
reference in his speech to the need for enhancing the organisational and
mobilization capabilities of the XPCC. Qi Xinping said the XPCC needed 
to strengthen its “capacity for maintaining stability and continuously improve 
its organizational advantages and ability to mobilize Xinjiang residents”. He 
called for forging the XPCC into a “top militia force in defense of the border 
line of China”, improving its capabilities related to stability maintenance and 
– 306 – 
CHINA’S THIRD CENTRAL XINJIANG WORK CONFERENCE 
contingency response, and establishing a “strong force that helps maintain the 
security along the border”.
The sharp rise in the XUAR’s security budget, pronounced emphasis
on stability maintenance and call to firmly establish a national ideology 
clearly indicated that the CCP will intensify ‘deradicalisation’ measures 
and ‘reeducation’ to more effectively absorb Uyghurs into the Han culture.
The expanded role of the XPCC will see its greater involvement in security
functions and its presence along Xinjiang’s borders with the Central Asian 
Republics and Russia. Xi Jinping’s acknowledgement of the good work
done between 2014 and 2019 is also implicit recognition of XUAR Party
Secretary Chen Quanguo’s efforts. Chen Quanguo, who was handpicked for 
appointment as Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) Party Secretary at then
Vice President Xi Jinping’s instance, was moved to Xinjiang on promotion as 
Politburo member in recognition of the good work done in the TAR. Born in 
1955, Chen Quanguo will be just 65 years old at the 20th Party Congress in 
2021 and will be in the running for elevation to the PBSC. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on October 
2, 2020.) 
– 307 – 
49. Inner-Party Differences on Hong Kong Issue 
Pose Problems for Xi Jinping 
China’s leadership will have been incensed by the photographs and videos 
of protestors in Hong Kong carrying American flags and chanting “America 
please take over Hong Kong” on September 9, in an apparent escalation of the 
protests against Chinese rule by millions of Hong Kong residents that have 
continued over fifteen weekends in the adverse glare of international media 
publicity. It would have underscored the concerns of senior and veteran leaders 
at the annual gathering in Beidaihe of a ‘colour revolution’. 
On September 10, protestors in Hong Kong ‘adopted’ a new ‘anthem’ 
for Hong Kong, which attracted over 700,000 views overnight and is being 
spontaneously sung by crowds in public places. The following day, the stateowned China Daily posted a notice on its official Facebook account warning 
that protestors in Hong Kong have secret plans to escalate protests from
September 11 with “massive” terrorist attacks, including blowing up gas 
pipelines in Hong Kong and attacks on non-Cantonese speaking people.
Xi Jinping’s apparent hesitation in taking action to quell the protests in 
Hong Kong is suggestive of differences within China’s top leadership, namely 
the Politburo (PB) and Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC). Xi Jinping 
is reported to have remarked in mid-August that the person responsible for 
the trouble in Hong Kong should resolve it—hinting at the seventh ranking 
PBSC member Han Zheng who is responsible for Hong Kong and Macau 
affairs. 
The tenor of reporting by Chinese-owned news outlets affiliated to 
different leadership factions in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) provided 
other indications of differences in China’s top leadership echelons. The USbased Duo Wei News (DW News) and HK01 in Hong Kong, both owned by
Yu Pinhai who owns a lot of theatres in China, are controlled by Xi Jinping’s
group. The US-based Boxun is affiliated with former Chinese President Jiang 
Zemin. 
INNER-PARTY DIFFERENCES ON HONG KONG ISSUE POSE PROBLEMS FOR XI JINPING 
In a subtly critical report HK01 pointed out that PBSC member Han 
Zheng directly manages Hong Kong affairs and that his visit to Shenzhen on 
June 30 was the first by a senior Chinese leader since the protests started in 
Hong Kong on July 1, which “reflects the attention that Beijing is paying to
Hong Kong”. It added that whenever there was a big event in Hong Kong in
the past, some top CCP leader would be present in Shenzhen to ‘supervise’ the 
work. Clashes between Hong Kong protestors and police have, incidentally,
occurred since June 1. On July 5, it reported that Han Zheng had returned to 
Beijing, and work to handle the situation in Hong Kong had begun. HK01 
said the top leadership had been caught unawares by the developments in
Hong Kong!
Separately, Epoch Times ( July 20) quoted a ‘princeling’ in Beijing as saying
that some top CCP officials had tried to force Chinese President Xi Jinping
to make mistakes.They had suggested the use of force and the military, or that 
the military take control. He said that Xi Jinping was, however, very clear that 
there would be no bloodshed and another June 4 event would be avoided at 
any cost. Maj Gen Chen Daoxiang, Commander of the People’s Liberation 
Army (PLA) stationed in Hong Kong, was reported to have personally
conveyed to David Helvey, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defence
for Asian and Pacific Security Affairs, US Department of Defence, on June 
13 that Beijing would not use the military. This was confirmed by the official 
The Paper, though it added that Chen Daoxiang had “strongly condemned the 
series of recent incidents of extreme violence in Hong Kong and expressed his 
attitude with the “Seven Resolutes.” 
The protests revealed that despite Hong Kong’s reversion to China over 
twenty years ago, neither its citizens nor Beijing yet trust each other and 
neither have the ‘one country, two systems’ been able to adjust to each other.
The Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office and Xinhua, China’s long-time
outpost in Hong Kong, were obviously unaware of the extent of public anger.
So also were pro-Beijing newspapers like Ta Kung Pao, Wen Wei Po, Sing Pao 
Daily News, Oriental Daily News, Sing Tao Daily and others. The CCP, which 
has over the decades penetrated all sections of Hong Kong, similarly, failed.
This despite large numbers of Hong Kong businessmen being close to it, at 
least 15 pro-Beijing groups and associations linked to Chinese provinces, and 
– 309 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
the CCP controlling the Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions, the largest
in Hong Kong. Reports reveal that since the end of July, more than a dozen 
officials from Beijing’s offices who are stationed in Hong Kong, including the
CCP Liaison Office in Hong Kong and the State Council’s Hong Kong and
Macao Affairs Office, have been punished and some even dismissed.
Initially, China banned all reporting on the protests by its official domestic 
media, but later instructed them to focus on the “violence” and describe the 
protests as foreign-funded. Conscious of international opinion, Beijing used
social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, etc. To mobilise favourable 
public opinion, it organised rallies by pro-Beijing students and prominent 
personalities abroad and persuaded Hong Kong businessmen and firms to
issue advertisements condemning the violence. China’s media publicised that 
overseas Chinese organisations in the UK, Southern California, Bangladesh,
Hungary, Madagascar, Madrid, etc had criticised the interference in China’s
internal affairs. 
Beijing’s position has visibly hardened in recent weeks. Servers of the 
Hong Kong based online discussion forum, LIHKG, used by the protestors 
to mobilise and organise their actions, have come under unprecedented 
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks. LIHKG said, “There is a 
power, or even a national level power behind the attacks as botnets from all 
over the world were manipulated in launching this attack.” Cathay Pacific, 
whose employees participated in the protests, was issued a “significant aviation 
safety risk warning” by the Civil Aviation Administration of China, causing
a sharp drop in its shares. Reports and photographs of the People’s Armed 
Police (PAP) and People’s Liberation Army (PLA) conducting manoeuvres 
outside neighbouring Shenzhen implied a hint of military action.
Prompted by its apprehension of the past couple of years of the West’s 
intentions, further accentuated by the US-China trade war, China quickly
labelled the protests as inspired by foreign forces and part of the West’s efforts 
to provoke a “colour revolution”—a term used to describe the movements to 
topple governments in Eastern Europe and Egypt, but not often used in China 
since 1990-91 till January this year by Xi Jinping. Hong Kong’s Ming Pao 
News reported (August 17) that at their annual gathering at Beidaihe, veteran 
CCP cadres reached a consensus to define the anti-extradition protests in 
– 310 – 
INNER-PARTY DIFFERENCES ON HONG KONG ISSUE POSE PROBLEMS FOR XI JINPING 
Hong Kong as a ‘colour revolution’ “led by military and political intelligence
agencies from multiple nations and regions”, with the CCP as the target. Ming
Pao claimed that the Hong Kong government may not be capable of handling
the protests within a limited time and Beijing can, under the law, provide 
all needed “assistance.” Among those who attended were former Chinese 
Presidents Hu Jintao and Jiang Zemin.
Yang Guang, spokesman for the State Council’s Hong Kong and Macao 
Affairs Office, said on September 3, that the protests have “clear features of a 
colour revolution”and the goal is to paralyse the Hong Kong government, seize 
the power for governing the Special Administrative Region (SAR) and make
“one country, two systems” an empty concept. Separately, Zhang Dinghuai, a 
Professor of Hong Kong and Macao Studies at Shenzhen University, listed 
the elements of colour revolutions, adding that the protests in Hong Kong
included many of these features and defied China’s Constitution.
Speaking at his pro-government “Our Hong Kong Foundation” on July
31, former Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa said,“Looking at the
political storm closely—its severity, scale, and organisation—it’s reasonable to 
believe that it’s fanned by someone from behind. Various signs are pointing at
Taiwan and the US”. Claiming that foreign politicians and anti-China forces 
have tried to incite fear of the Chinese Communist Party and turn Hong
Kong into a base to resist the central government, he asserted that “a small 
number of people” are trying “to damage the relationship between the central 
government and the SAR”, and such acts are unacceptable.
In the backdrop of continuous threats that Beijing will reunify Taiwan 
with the Mainland by force if required,Taiwan is monitoring the developments 
very carefully. The protests have boosted Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen’s
popularity ahead of the upcoming elections in January. Interesting was her 
response to media reports of Hong Kong protestors arriving in Taiwan. She 
said, “These friends from Hong Kong will be treated in an appropriate way on
humanitarian grounds.”
Other indications of Beijing’s toughened stance include an article in the 
Chinese language official Global Times (August 17) hinting that the ‘leaders’ 
of the movement would be punished. It listed: (i) Jimmy Lai for meeting with
Pence, Pompeo, and Bolton in July and publishing anti-extradition statements 
– 311 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
in the New York Times; (ii) Martin Lee Chu-ming for meeting with Pompeo
in May and Julie Eadeh, US Consulate General, in Hong Kong in August;
(iii) Anson Chan, for meeting with Pence, Pelosi, and representatives from 
the National Security Bureau, for appealing and calling on the US to put 
pressure on Beijing in March as well as meeting with Julie Eadeh in August;
(iv) Albert Ho Chun-yan for attending the protest in Yuen Long in July
and meeting with a male foreigner in August; (v) Joshua Wong Chi-fung
for meeting with Julie Eadeh in August; and for inciting violence during the 
protests; (vi) Nathan Law Kwun-chung for making up rumours to endanger
the police force, for calling on the public to participate in the protest through
social media, and for meeting Julie Eadeh in August; and (vii) Alex Chow
Yong-kang for his speech in the US in March in which he stated that there 
is no democracy and freedom in Hong Kong, for calling on the US House of
Representatives to further study the development of Hong Kong democracy,
and for participating in protest activities in front of the Chinese Consulate in 
New York in August.
On August 21, Zang Tiewei, spokesman of the Legislative Affairs 
Commission of the Standing Committee of China’s National People’s 
Congress, dismissed the possibility of acceding to the demand for universal 
suffrage and reiterated, “Recently, some illegal criminals in Hong Kong have 
openly attacked the legislature, violently attacked the police, and wilfully beat 
innocent people. These acts are serious crimes in any country under the rule 
of law and will be punished according to the law.”The protests have damaged
Hong Kong’s economy, lessening its importance to China. Large numbers of
businessmen have moved their wealth out and the number of visitors to Hong
Kong has fallen since June. Official data released on August 16 showed that 
Hong Kong’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth for the second quarter 
dipped to 0.5 per cent year on year, the lowest in more than seven years and 
the value of goods exported and imported via Hong Kong in the first half of
2019, fell 3.6 per cent and 4.5 per cent year-on-year respectively. Hong Kong
officials assess that Hong Kong is on the verge of recession amid social unrest 
and the escalating trade war.
The continuing protests have undoubtedly severely embarrassed China’s 
leadership and become a test case for legitimacy of the CCP. Chinese President 
– 312 – 
INNER-PARTY DIFFERENCES ON HONG KONG ISSUE POSE PROBLEMS FOR XI JINPING 
Xi Jinping cannot allow them to drag on without hurting his position.Though
international opinion is important, Beijing will be more sensitive to the 
potential fall-out of the protests inside China and on Taiwan. Beijing will 
probably try and use Hong Kong’s forces to deter others and restore calm 
in Hong Kong. China would not like to have its 70th founding anniversary
celebrations on October 1 marred by disorder. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 12, 2019.) 
– 313 – 
50. DPP’s Win in Taiwan Elections will have 
Repercussions 
The results of Taiwan’s national elections announced on January 12, confirmed 
assessments that Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen’s popularity ratings had 
received a substantial boost, partly because of China’s threatening posture 
but mainly because of the unceasing protests in Hong Kong that have now 
entered their ninth month without losing popular support. The results will 
impact China. Beijing—and Chinese President Xi Jinping—now confront 
the prospect of the ‘China Dream’, envisaging China’s ‘reunification’ by 2021 
or even 2049, becoming a distant prospect. The results could have wider 
repercussions in the region.
Discouraging for Beijing will be the fact that it will now have to view the 
pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) as one with a sizeable 
following that contests China’s “one country, two systems” policy and has 
overtly challenged its claims of sovereignty over Taiwan.Taiwan President Tsai 
Ing-wen has, in fact, assiduously sought to build Taiwan’s defence capability 
with Taiwan’s defence budget expected to reach US$ 11.9 billion in 2020.
Beijing would need to accept that ‘Taiwan identity’ and nationalism have both 
acquired a prominent salience for the people of Taiwan.
With the mandate for a new four-year term, the DPP will seek to 
consolidate its position and project itself as representing the youth, who by
some estimates, accounted for almost half the total number of votes polled 
by the DPP. By being unwavering in her policy of not yielding to China on 
issues of independence and sovereignty while, at the same time, trying to avoid 
hostilities with it, Tsai Ing-wen has shown Taiwan that such a policy can be 
viable. She has shown too, that its appeal overrides that of the better economic 
prospects anticipated from a compromise with Beijing. Beijing would now 
need to try and ‘befriend’ political parties other than the Kuomintang (KMT),
as well as sections of Taiwan society, apart from China-dependent businesses.
It will undoubtedly step up its ‘united front’ activities. 
 
 
DPP’S WIN IN TAIWAN ELECTIONS WILL HAVE REPERCUSSIONS 
Initial official Chinese media reactions suggest that Beijing has been grudging
in its acceptance of the DPP’s win, and does not yet feel the need to change its
policy towards Taiwan. China’s state-owned China Global Television Network 
(CGTN) newscasts did not mention the clear trends of a DPP victory till 6 pm
on January 11.The authoritative, official news agency Xinhua published an article
that reluctantly acknowledged Tsai Ing-wen’s victory, while the more nationalistic 
but official Beijing-based Global Times cautioned ( January 12) that the US “will
get up to more little tricks on the Taiwan question in the coming years”, but
that “China should firmly maintain the one-China principle and …. We should
strive to hold the initiative of the Taiwan Straits in our own hands”. Asserting
that “first, we must strengthen the right to define the situation of the Taiwan
Strait” and that it should not be decided by the US and “Taiwan authorities”,
it warned, “We can ignore some of the messages that they want to highlight,
and we can harshly stop the acts that they want to slip through unpunished”. It
said China should maintain the “one-China principle” and “should encourage
Tsai to ease her cross-Strait policies and not to further antagonize the Chinese
Mainland”. It bluntly reiterated that China must meanwhile “plan to crack down
on Tsai’s new provocative actions, including imposing military pressure, which
is an unbearable option for Taiwan authorities”. It emphasised, in conclusion,
that “the comprehensive strength of the Mainland has been increasing, we have
enough ability to contain ‘Taiwan independence.’ This is a fact that even those 
‘Taiwan independence’ forces believe firmly”.
There have been adequate indications that as China becomes militarily 
stronger, the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) increasingly feels that an
offensive against Taiwan would be successful. Chinese President Xi Jinping
has said he would not like to leave the ‘reunification’ to successor generations.
In February 2019, the PLA Air Force (PLAAF) released a music video called 
“My War Eagles are Circling the Treasure Island” featuring aerial footage of
Taiwan and, in April and August, PLA fighter jets, for the first time in 20 
years, crossed the median line in the Taiwan Strait.The PLA Navy’s (PLAN’s)
aircraft carriers Liaoning and Shandong similarly broke with precedent and 
sailed through the Taiwan Strait in June and December 2019. In September
a Chinese government-backed Twitter account replied to a post by Taiwan’s
President saying: “Once we have dealt with Hong Kong, we will settle the 
– 315 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
scores with Taiwan, military unification is unavoidable, we’ll keep the island
but won’t keep the people except for [Taiwanese pop star] Jay Chou”. Enoch 
Wu, a member of Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen’s last National Security
Council, recently observed, “We can debate whether it’s 2020 or 2022, but we
know it’s not 2049.” Taiwan’s military capabilities are limited with mountain 
tunnels at two air bases providing safe shelters for more than 200 aircraft, but 
it is developing advanced sea mining capabilities, building fast attack craft and 
hoping to get meaningful assurances from the US. Thus far, though, Beijing
has kept to psychological warfare, it will try and intensify diplomatic pressure 
on Taiwan, including by shrinking its diplomatic space.
The election victory of DPP leader Tsai Ing-wen has come at an 
inopportune time for Chinese President Xi Jinping. It coincides with the 
protests in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR), where 
23 years after reverting to China, the people have challenged Beijing’s right 
to govern Hong Kong and the legitimacy of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP). It coincides too with the growing US-China friction and clear signs
of the beginnings of disengagement between the two. Beijing’s failure to 
resolve these problems could make it difficult for China to realise its declared 
ambition of a ‘peaceful reunification’ and the ‘China Dream’ by 2021. Whether 
the developments will give an impetus to the resistance in Xinjiang and Tibet 
is unclear, but Beijing has repeatedly warned against attempts by the US and 
the West at instigating “colour revolutions”.
AsTsai Ing-wen commences her second term,it is possible that US President
Trump and she will initiate ‘quiet’ contacts to shore up Taiwan’s position and
that will put pressure on China. The latter’s comment on the congratulatory
message from the White House to Tsai Ing-wen indicates how China would
view this. China will react to increased overt US-Taiwan interactions. Given 
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s and the Chinese security bureaucracy’s suspicions
about “colour revolutions”, vigilance has already been stepped up throughout
the country. On November 28, Guo Shengkun, who is head of the Chinese
Communist Party’s (CCP’s) Political and Legal Affairs Commission, published 
an article in the People’s Daily calling for the firm defence of “national political
security,” which is “the lifeline of the Party’s and the nation’s security, and an
unshakable bottom line.”He vowed “resolutely and severely to prevent and crack 
– 316 – 
 
DPP’S WIN IN TAIWAN ELECTIONS WILL HAVE REPERCUSSIONS 
down on”the infiltration of hostile forces. In the article, Guo Shengkun exhorted
the whole country and entire population to enhance their awareness, be “on
high vigilance, take resolute precautions, and severely punish” the hostile forces’
infiltration and their destructive and subversive, activities to promote secession,
thus “building a solid copper and iron wall for national security.”
But the delay in diffusing the problem in Hong Kong remains 
unexplained and points to differences within the Politburo. It was only in 
late July, a month after the protests began, that Chinese President Xi Jinping
publicly commented on them. Another couple of months passed before he 
and Politburo Standing Committee member Han Zheng separately met
HKSAR Chief Executive Carrie Lam. These meetings took place after the 
important annual meeting of Party veterans and senior cadres at the seaside 
resort of Beidaihe, where the protests in Hong Kong were labelled a “colour 
revolution”. Subsequently, in mid-December 2019, another report hinting at
inner-Party sniping surfaced. It alleged that a ‘princeling’ of a high-ranking
military family and current member of the Politburo Standing Committee
(PBSC) had access to substantial wealth abroad. The report in the Epoch
Times, which is owned by Falungong, a cult proscribed in China, gave enough
specifics about the ‘princeling’ to suggest that the newspaper is aware of the 
individual’s identity and perhaps intends to divulge it later. The situation is 
tenuous with the potential to put Xi Jinping under greater pressure. 
As Tsai Ing-wen commences her second term, it is likely that she will reenergise her ‘Southbound Policy’ to reduce economic dependence on China
and counter its efforts to diminish its space.The evolving cross-strait situation 
and political developments in China present India with an opportunity. India 
should actively consider initiating economic and commercial contacts with 
Taiwan in the slipstream of these developments in select areas. A visit by the 
Union Commerce Minister or Secretary would be welcomed by Taipei and,
given China’s extensive commercial and trade ties with Taiwan, cannot be 
objected to by Beijing. For India, it would result in foreign investments in 
sectors that will upgrade Indian industry and job creation. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
January 15,2020.) 
– 317 – 
  
51. CPEC and Challenges for Pakistan
 
China’s ‘One Belt, One Road’ (OBOR), which was first proposed in September 
2013 and combines the twin initiatives of the Silk Road Economic Belt and 21st 
Century Maritime Silk Road, is a grand concept that envisions China girdling 
the globe. Potentially covering 55 per cent of the world Gross National Product 
(GNP), 70 per cent of the global population, and 75 per cent of known energy 
reserves, it is essentially a plan for a China-built land and sea transportation 
artery to link China’s production centres with markets and natural resource 
centres around the world. At the same time, it will harness much of China’s 
hitherto idle economy, manpower and infrastructure-technology reserves to 
get much needed returns. The initiative blends geopolitical and diplomatic 
objectives and has a strong domestic agenda.
The ‘Belt Corridors’ run along the major Eurasian Land Bridges,
through China-Mongolia-Russia, China-Central and West Asia, ChinaIndochina Peninsula, China-Pakistan, Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar.
The Maritime Silk Route or “Road” is the maritime equivalent of the ‘Belt 
Corridors’ and comprises a network of planned ports and other coastal 
infrastructure projects that dot the map from South and Southeast Asia to 
East Africa and the northern Mediterranean Sea. 
While Chinese officials and academics emphasise the economic aspects 
and commercial advantages of OBOR, it includes geopolitical and diplomatic 
objectives.  Implementation of OBOR will augment China’s economic 
influence in the participating countries. The strategy of disbursing them large 
sums as loans and aid will enhance the financial power that China already 
exercises through its trading relationships.
Huang Yiping, a Professor of Economics at Peking University’s National 
School of Development, assessed in February 2015, that OBOR represents 
a sea-change in China’s international profile. According to him, OBOR has 
ended the phase of low-profile diplomacy based on Deng Xiaoping’s advice to 
“hide your capabilities and bide your time” and transformed China into “a new 
CPEC AND CHALLENGES FOR PAKISTAN 
great power”which “is trying to supplement the international economic order”.
Huang Yiping sought to justify China’s more active role as an attempt to redress 
the limited role given to developing countries in international institutions and 
in line with US President Barack Obama’s demand that China take on more 
responsibility for providing international public goods. A Renmin University 
report similarly asserted the need to “supplement, not challenge” the existing 
order because of the “zero-sum thinking” which ensured that OBOR projects 
were greeted with scepticism including in China’s immediate neighbourhood.
Taking note of the challenges ahead, Huang Yiping conceded: “One Belt, One 
Road is a good international economic strategy, but for now it is certainly not 
an easy one”.
The most publicised bilateral commitment to OBOR was the investment 
pledged for the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) by Xi Jinping
during his two-day visit to Pakistan in April 2015. The CPEC is the first leg
of OBOR to be operationalised and is China’s flagship venture. It traverses a 
distance of approximately 2,000 km from Kashgar in China’s Xinjiang region
till the port of Gwadar in Balochistan. When launched, it was a $45 billion 
economic and development package that could grow to around $60 billion.
Of the $45 billion, energy sector projects accounted for around $34 billion 
whereas the infrastructure sector accounted for approximately $10 billion.
The CPEC will include the construction of industrial parks, agricultural 
farms, railways, airports, roads, a fibre-optic network, energy-generating 
projects including one of the world’s largest solar farms, and a high-speed
train between Karachi and Peshawar that will travel over 160 km per hour.  All 
these projects will be built according to Chinese plans, with Chinese labour,
and will be connected to Chinese businesses. The project will also build a 
new telecommunications network linking Pakistan with China and, through
China, to Europe. 
The CPEC includes a number of initiatives in Pakistan that are not only
economic in nature, but have cultural and civic implications. The Safe Cities 
initiative, for instance,is primarily designed to safeguard Chinese workers from 
Pakistani terrorists, but will also transform many of Pakistan’s cities.  The Safe 
Cities project includes building new, safer buildings in urban centres, training
local police and military in anti-terrorist and bomb detection techniques, and 
– 319 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
the use of lighting and cameras to create safe zones in all Pakistani cities. It is 
also preparing to protect the CPEC inside Pakistan. A secure fibre-optic link
has been laid connecting Kashgar, headquarters of China’s People’s Liberation 
Army’s (PLA’s) South Xinjiang Military District with the Pakistan Army
General Headquarters (GHQ) at Rawalpindi, highlighting the close military 
coordination between Pakistan and China. The PLA’s Western Theatre 
Command, established in 2016, is also tasked to safeguard Chinese workers,
investments and projects in the CPEC in addition to protecting China’s land 
frontiers. China, at the same time, informed Islamabad that it is creating a
division-strength “private army” for deployment in the areas covered by the 
CPEC. Chinese security organisations have begun functioning in Pakistan.
China has already put in place a domestic legal basis for the deployment of 
Chinese troops and security personnel to protect Chinese investments and 
workers abroad. The operational tasks assigned to the PLA’s Western Theatre 
Command represent the first of such arrangements.
While this project will no doubt create safer cities, many are concerned 
that much of the traditional areas of some of these historic cities will be 
destroyed to build newer, albeit safer, neighbourhoods1
. 
Disadvantages to Pakistan
Assessments of the the CPEC’s benefits to Pakistan vary considerably, but 
a study by DeLoitte2
 is interesting. Pointing out that the volume of trade 
between Pakistan and China had increased to US$ 16 billion by 2014–15,
the study alluded to the impending benefits. It estimated that if all planned 
projects were implemented, their value would exceed all Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) in Pakistan since 1970 and would be equivalent to 17
per cent of Pakistan’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2015. It further 
estimated that the CPEC will create some 700,000 direct jobs during 2015–
30, adding up to 2.5 percentage points to the country’s growth. Importantly,
it noted that the Karakoram Highway between Rawalpindi and the Chinese
border will be completely reconstructed and overhauled, and Pakistan’s 
railway network will be extended to eventually connect to China’s Southern 
Xinjiang Railway in Kashgar. Almost 80 per cent of China’s oil is currently 
transported over 16,000 km from the Strait of Malacca to Shanghai, but once 
– 320 – 
 
CPEC AND CHALLENGES FOR PAKISTAN 
Gwadar becomes operational, this distance would reduce to less than 5,000 
km. The CPEC will simultaneously open immense economic opportunities 
for Pakistan, and physically connect China to its markets in Asia, Europe and
beyond. According to the China Daily, the energy projects would provide up
to 16,400 MW of energy altogether with over 10,400 Mega Watts (MW) of 
energy generating capacity developed between 2018 and 2020 as part of the 
corridor’s fast-tracked “Early Harvest” project.
The assessment of the Deloitte study is not mirrored in the numerous
comments and articles by Pakistani politicians, journalists and academics.While
they are appreciative that the CPEC has brought a massive influx of much
needed infrastructure aid and investment to Pakistan, they are apprehensive that
Pakistan risks losing sovereignty to China. The study fails to take into account
the high energy production cost of these power plants. With fuel mandated
to be imported from China’s Xinjiang Autonomous Region, the cost per unit
of electricity generated by the new power plants would be double the present,
imposing a very high burden on the consumers. Early indicators suggest that the
time and production estimates are exaggerated.Politicians in Pakistan’s provinces
have complained for the past year that locals are not getting employment in the
CPEC projects and are not even being allowed access as the sites are ‘protected’ 
by 10-foot-high perimeter walls. Pakistan media reports claim that around
9,800 locals were hired for the construction of the 392-km highway from 
Multan in Punjab to Sukkur in Sindh. Similarly, the Suki-Kinari hydropower
project in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is expected to create  more than 4,000 jobs.
In terms of jobs actually created, it is reported that the China Machinery
Engineering Corporation’s (CMEC’s) Thar lignite mining and coal-fired power
plant in Sindh has created over 1,000 jobs so far, while the Sahiwal power plant,
southwest of Lahore in Punjab province ‘hired 3,000 locals’.The actual figures of
employment are at great variance with the predicted figure of 700,000.
On the other hand,there has been a huge influx of Chinese labour.Chinese 
restaurants, grocery stores, guesthouses and language centres have opened 
across Pakistan, aimed mainly at the country’s growing population of Chinese
citizens. The supermarket shelves are lined with products manufactured 
in China3
: everything from noodles to hardhat construction helmets, sea kelp
to stationery, spice mixes to industrial meat grinders. Consequently, there has 
– 321 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
been no benefit to Pakistan’s economy as no money is coming in through the 
service sectors as well. 
Politicians, academicians and journalists have voiced serious concerns 
about Pakistan’s mounting debt to China and the anticipated high cost of
electricity from the new energy projects. Expressing concern about the
viability of the CPEC, Ali Malik, a researcher at the South Asia Programme
at the Hudson Institute in Washington DC, on January 4, 2017, pointed out
that “most of Pakistan’s urban centres are located in the east, not the west and 
that inter-provincial resentment and differences have flared, with the western 
provinces accusing the centre of being partial to the country’s eastern portion, 
where the majority of Pakistan’s economic bases are located”. 
There are other questions about the economic viability of the CPEC, for 
which the bulk of financing has come in the form of loan-based financing, and 
not unconditional grants from the Chinese government. Though the loans are 
given to individual construction companies involved with the projects, there 
are significant risks to the government. Many of the power projects are under 
sovereign guarantees, thus, making the Pakistani government responsible if
these companies fail to meet their debt obligations. Pakistan’s current liabilities 
(debt), both private and public, have reached a staggering 75 per cent of the
GDP (Rs. 22.5 trillion).
According to a Financial Times (FT) report, Pakistani officials feel that 
lending money to Pakistan also favours China, as it does not wish to disclose 
details of the loans that are part of the  CPEC project4
. “The Chinese are 
not keen on Western institutions learning the minute details of [financing
of ] CPEC projects,” an unnamed official in Islamabad was quoted as saying.
“An IMF programme will require Pakistan to disclose the financial terms to 
its officials.” According to the FT report, prior to the April 2018 loan of $1 
billion, Pakistan had borrowed almost $1.2 billion from Chinese banks since 
April 2017. Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan and Chinese Premier Li 
Keqiang met in November 2018 after which China agreed to provide aid for 
Pakistan’s deteriorating economic situation. On the other hand, some people
have alleged that China’s generosity may worsen Pakistan’s financial difficulties.
Additional worries are that the CPEC’s success depends entirely on
Pakistan’s ability to export goods and services and show a strong rise in exports. 
– 322 – 
CPEC AND CHALLENGES FOR PAKISTAN 
Pakistani analysts warned that these sectors of the economy would have to 
compete with the influx of cheaper Chinese imports that have the potential
ability to strangle the domestic market. Chinese imports have, incidentally,
already grown from 4 per cent in 2010 to 9 per cent in 2015. Economists 
say that if this downward trend of exports and increase in imports continues,
Pakistan will face a serious balance of payments crisis. Others suggest that
Pakistan is already on the verge of experiencing a crisis, as debt servicing
will increase to between 30 per cent and 60 per cent by 2020 because of the 
CPEC and Pakistan’s purchase of Eurobonds. There is a general view that 
in order to safeguard its economic future, Pakistan must be cautious in how 
it implements and administers completion of the CPEC. More importantly,
they assert that the central government must be honest about the nature of 
Chinese investment as Pakistan risks losing its sovereignty, being beholden to
China, and exploited by it for its natural resources and geostrategic location.
For China, however, the centre-pieces of the CPEC are the Gwadar 
port and the area of the Karakoram in the north. It has eyed Gwadar for 
years and agreed to fund its development only after Pakistan agreed to grant
it “sovereign guarantees to the port facilities” in 2007. Gwadar is important 
for China’s maritime ambitions. As China enlarges its Navy and retains a 
permanent presence in the Indian Ocean, its aircraft carriers, other surface 
warships and submarines will require a base. The importance of Gwadar 
for China is emphasised by the inclusion of Gwadar International Airport 
and other major development works of Gwadar port in the CPEC’s first 
phase with completion targeted for 2017. A total of 9 projects valued at 
approximately US$ 1 billion, each intended to augment China’s commercial 
and military capacity, are planned in and around Gwadar. China is reported to 
have established electronic eavesdropping posts at Gwadar.
The CPEC’s first phase also includes expansion of the Karakoram 
Highway, connecting Pakistan’s railway network to China’s Southern Xinjiang
Railway to Kashgar, and placing of a secure fibre-optic line between Kashgar
and Rawalpindi, all projects of military significance. What is really interesting
is that when tensions rose early last year because of Pakistani complaints about
the rising costs and the slow pace of work, China sought to assuage Pakistan 
and said many of the projects around Gwadar would be grants! The security 
– 323 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
of Gwadar is a source of continued concern for the Chinese and has imposed
a heavy financial burden on Pakistan. In January 2016, the Pakistan Navy
decided to deploy two additional Marine Battalions to provide round the clock 
security at Gwadar. On 21 September 2016, in the wake of the deterioration in 
Indo-Pakistan relations over Kashmir, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang publicly
expressed reservations and told Pakistan’s former Prime Minister Nawaz 
Sharif that he “hoped” Pakistan could continue to provide protection to the 
CPEC and Chinese personnel in Pakistan. The official Chinese newspaper
Global Times similarly warned that “the increasing cost of security is becoming
a big problem in efficiently pushing forward the project.” In November 2016,
during the inaugural Kashgar-Gwadar cargo run and subsequent transfer of
the containers to waiting vessels at Gwadar port, Pakistani officials went to 
great lengths to allay Chinese concerns and the Pakistan Navy deployed ships
and aircraft to provide security cover to ensure safe and secure transit.
Since Gwadar became operational, the role of Pakistan’s maritime forces 
has increased and the Pakistan Navy has been assigned special responsibility 
to protect the Gwadar seaport project and the more than 500 Chinese 
nationals working there from offshore threats. Pakistan has set up a Special
Security Division (SSD) under a Major General solely for protecting CPEC 
construction sites. With China refusing to provide any financial assistance 
towards the security expenses of the CPEC, the Pakistan government on 
September 24, 2016, decided to meet such expenses by adding 1 per cent more 
to the cost of all central energy projects and recovering it from consumers 
through the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority.This cess is to help
the Pakistan Army meet expenses incurred on the SSD. The Senate Standing
Committee on Planning Development and Reform has protested over the 
billing of Pakistani citizens for providing security to Chinese nationals in
Pakistan. 
Pakistani politicians are already complaining about the US$ 12 million a 
year expenditure on the SSD, which is now expected to double. The success of 
the CPEC and Gwadar port depends on having a safe and secure maritime 
environment in the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean region in general.
Envisaging attacks by militant groups or insurgents on seaports and vessels,
and use of the container vessels to smuggle weapons, drugs etc., Pakistan has 
– 324 – 
CPEC AND CHALLENGES FOR PAKISTAN 
strengthened maritime security capabilities.This includes: intensifying security 
patrols and coastal exercises; creation of Coastal Watch Stations; establishing
a Joint Maritime Information Coordination Centre ( JMICC); establishment 
of the Force Protection Battalion of the Pakistan Marines; and more robust 
maritime security activities jointly by Pakistan and China. Collaboration in 
building Navy craft has been stepped up. China and Pakistan have agreed to 
jointly construct the F-22P frigate in addition to the Azmat and Jalalat class 
fast-attack craft and corvettes for the Pakistan Maritime Security Agency.
In June 2015, Pakistan’s Ministry of Defence Production signed a contract
with M/s China Ship Trading Company for the construction of seven 
maritime patrol ships, four of which are being built in China and the others
at the Karachi Shipyard and Engineering Works. The China Shipbuilding
Industry Corporation (CSIC) is to also provide Pakistan’s Navy with eight 
attack submarines. Pakistan has to pay for these vessels. Other serious issues 
threatening the development of Gwadar have surfaced, with Pakistani analysts 
implying that China has undue interest in Gwadar port. Gwadar is described 
as an “island isolated in an arid landscape, with roads and railways linking it
to the rest of the nation.” The city’s water supply dam has dried up following
three years of drought.The existing desalination plant does not work and there 
is no more water. Unless Gwadar gets its full road and rail connectivity, the 
port cannot flourish. Gwadar additionally symbolises the sense of alienation 
felt by many in Balochistan, who suspect that most of the benefits of the
CPEC are going to outsiders.
However, the non-flexible and strict terms and conditions imposed
by Beijing have led to unsuccessful negotiations on some projects between 
Islamabad and the Chinese government. In November 2017, Pakistan backed 
out from the Diamer-Basha Dam project due to its “unrealistic” terms and 
conditions and as China taking ownership of the entire project was stated
to be unacceptable by the former Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi.
The Diamer-Basha Dam is excluded from the list of CPEC projects and
the Pakistan government is now funding the project on its own after some 
changes in the project’s design.The new Pakistani government has also rejected
China’s proposal to build a US$60 billion coal-fired power plant under the
CPEC. The Pakistani newspaper Dawn reported that Prime Minister Imran 
– 325 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Khan, who took office in August 2018, officially informed Beijing that the 
country is not interested in building the Rahim Yar Khan power plant.
Besides this, the Chinese influx is creating fissures in the feudal Pakistani 
society. A recent scandal was unearthed in Pakistan about Chinese men,
with the help of collaborators in Pakistan, marrying young Pakistani women 
after making cash payments to their families, and taking them to China. The 
human trafficking issue gained widespread attention in April, 2019 when 
Pakistani television broadcaster ARY News raided a compound in Lahore,
where several Chinese men were discovered with six Pakistani wives, two of 
whom were 13 years old. ARY News reported that the men paid Rs 400,000
($2,820) to each of the women’s families, who were also promised Rs 40,000 
in monthly payments and a Chinese visa to a male relative of the bride. One 
of the women who were forced into a marriage, contacted the broadcaster,
which led to the expose. The Chinese Embassy in Pakistan issued a statement 
on April 13, 2019 conceding that while some unlawful match-making centres 
earned illegal profits from brokering cross-national marriages by victimising
Pakistani and Chinese youth,it termed the reports of organ sales as “misleading
and groundless.” 
Challenges for CPEC in Pakistan
The major problems that the CPEC faces in Pakistan are the regional and 
ethnic differences and conflicts.  Created in 1947 as a country for the Muslims
of the Indian subcontinent, Pakistan is, in fact, composed of several, not always
friendly, ethnic enclaves.  Pakistan’s four provinces and two autonomous areas 
generally, but not perfectly, represent these groups.These ethnic groups include 
the Punjabis, who make up almost 45 per cent of the national population and
dominate the national government; the Pashtuns, a conservative tribal group,
who live in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and make up about 17 per cent
of Pakistan’s population; the Sindhis, who live in large feudal estates in Sindh 
province, including the city of Karachi, and constitute about 14 per cent of
the country’s population; the Balochis, who live in the relatively poor area of 
Balochistan and make up less than 4 per cent of Pakistan’s population; and the 
Muhajirs, who are the descendants of the refugees who fled India in 1947 and
do not have a province of their own, but reside in Karachi and areas around 
– 326 – 
  
CPEC AND CHALLENGES FOR PAKISTAN 
that city and make up about 8 per cent of the country’s population.  Other 
groups include the Kashmiris, the Brahuis, and the Saraikis from Multan.
Regional and ethnic rivalries and feuds have played a major role in 
Pakistan’s short history. For instance, although the official language of
Pakistan is Urdu, (and English), it is spoken as a native language by only about 
8 per cent of the population.  Urdu, in fact, was the language spoken by the 
Muslims in the Indian subcontinent, but not by the people who lived in the 
area that is now Pakistan. 
These ethnic and regional rivalries represent not only differences in 
culture or language, but also bitter rivalries for national political and economic 
dominance.  This clash of cultures is particularly exhibited in the tension 
between the military, dominated by the Pashtuns, and the Punjabis who 
control the apparatus of the national government.  The military has stepped in 
several times since 1947, declaring martial law and replacing incompetent and 
corrupt national governments.
Balochistan, which has a potentially pivotal role in the CPEC, is another 
province in ethnic turmoil.  Balochistan is the largest province and has many
natural resources.  However, the Balochis have the lowest standard of living
of any ethnic group in Pakistan and feel alienated from the Pakistani power 
structure. Because of this, in part, a number of militant Baloch separatist 
groups have emerged and have been causing trouble. 
The fear among many Pakistanis is that the CPEC will only enrich the 
Punjabis (some have suggested that the “P” in CPEC stands for Punjab),
since the Punjabis control the national government, while leaving the rest of 
Pakistan relatively poor.  This is especially a concern of the Balochis and the 
Pashtuns, who have already seen many of the CPEC programmes directed 
away from their provinces and towards the Punjab or Sindh province. The 
obvious case is of the new highway being built as part of the initiative between 
Kashgar and Gwadar.  One of the routes in the original plan, referred to as 
the Western Route, was to go through the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. 
However, the route was changed by Islamabad to avoid that province. The 
route is now planned to run largely through the Punjab and Sindh provinces. 
True, a large section of the route will be through Balochistan, but largely in the 
remote areas of the southern section of the province, and will, therefore, not 
– 327 – 
  
  
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
benefit Balochistan much.  Both the provincial governments of the Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan have voted against the CPEC and have 
petitioned the national government in Islamabad to include more projects in 
provinces other than the Punjab5
. 
The fate of the project in Balochistan is the key to the ultimate success
of the CPEC since the use of the port of Gwadar is one of the project’s key
elements. Increasing calls in Balochistan for the creation of a separate state and
ensuing armed conflict pose an enormous challenge to the corridor.  Baloch 
nationalists oppose the project as the demographic balance could ultimately
turn against them, making them a minority in their own province with other 
ethnic groups moving into the province.  Even presently, the Baloch people
only make up about 55 per cent of the population of Balochistan. This anger 
towards the CPEC has increased to the point that Chinese citizens have been 
kidnapped and killed by Baluch militant groups.
On May 13, 2017, gunmen killed 10 Chinese labourers working on the
CPEC project in Gwadar. The attack was carried out by the Baloch Liberation 
Army (BLA) a group reportedly fighting for an independent homeland for
the Baluchis. A spokesperson for the BLA said6
, “This conspiratorial plan,
CPEC, is not acceptable to the Baloch people under any circumstances.”
In addition, the CPEC, and with it China’s cultural and economic 
incursion into Pakistan is reminiscent to many of the British rule in the 
Indian subcontinent from 1858 to 1947. China’s influence in Pakistan is not 
of the same nature—China does not officially claim to govern the country—
but there are similarities which many in Pakistan have noticed and this could 
trigger considerable ethnic and regional pushback against the projects. 
Militant Islam 
Pakistan was created in 1947 as an avowedly Muslim country. As a result, 
Islamic doctrines, laws, and institutions have been a part of Pakistan since
the beginning.  However, though Islamic political parties have always been
active, in the last couple of decades, a new kind of Islamic militancy has
emerged.  These orthodox militant parties include homegrown groups
such as the  Tehreek-e Taliban  and Lashkar-e Jhangvi, which are local or
regionally based organisations with specific agendas internal to Pakistan. 
– 328 – 
 
CPEC AND CHALLENGES FOR PAKISTAN 
One target of these groups comprises the religious minorities in Pakistan,
including the small Christian minority and the Shia Muslims whom they
consider heretics and idol-worshipers.  These groups strongly oppose foreign
intervention, including by the Chinese, and will constitute a challenge to the
CPEC. 
Other militant Islamic groups are connected to, or supported by, transnational Islamic movements. These include the Lashkar-e-Tayyeba (LeT) and 
the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen (HuM).  Also, increasingly active in Pakistan are 
elements of the Islamic State, Al-Qaeda, and Afghan Taliban.  These groups
have been responsible for a number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan.  Militant 
Islamic movements have deep roots and can be traced back to the beginning
of Pakistan. They received a fillip in the 1980s when the United States and 
Saudi Arabia, among others, poured considerable amounts of money into 
creating madrasahs on the Afghan-Pakistan border to recruit and train Afghan
Mujahideen to fight the Soviets. The Pakistani military and powerful InterServices Intelligence (ISI) participated in this effort and continue to retain 
their links and nurture them. These Islamic militant groups are useful to the 
Pakistani military establishment in many ways and especially to wage the 
low-intensity conflict against India in Kashmir. But these militant Islamic 
groups also harbour a profound and deep hatred of the West, and especially
the United States and favour orthodox Islam. 
These militant Islamic groups would,therefore,potentially be particularly
dangerous for the Chinese projects in Pakistan.  China does not have a 
good image in the Islamic world and its treatment, especially of the Uyghurs
in Xinjiang province, has generated resentment.  An indication was when
Hafez Syed of the LeT warned then Prime Minister Nawaz Sharief against
Pakistan’s “new best friend” and asked him to enquire about their treatment
of Muslims in Xinjiang during Ramzan. This resentment will fester. The 
presence of thousands of Chinese workers and their habits and customs will
offend the orthodox Muslims residing in rural Pakistan where the CPEC
projects are sited. Attacks on Chinese citizens in Pakistan have already taken
place and will continue.  Although the Chinese will create safe places for
their workers, there will be a continual threat of violence against Chinese
citizens in Pakistan. 
– 329 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
In conclusion, it is clear that the CPEC will confront many problems in 
Pakistan.These will include the threat to Chinese workers and personnel from 
the rural Muslim population of Pakistan and the Balochis who apprehend 
being marginalised in their home province. Other difficulties will centre on 
the Pakistani reappraisal of the CPEC and China’s financial agreements on 
CPEC projects. Allegations that they are heavily skewed in China’s favour are 
gaining ground. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank 
too, at the US’ instance, have insisted that Pakistan provide detailed accounts 
for the CPEC projects. A Pakistan whose economy is in dire straits and is 
seeking loans from them will have fewer alternatives. The accusation that 
Pakistan risks losing sovereignty to China is emotive and has the potential to 
spread. It could get aggravated with the presence of Chinese security personnel
in Pakistan, which has already triggered local tensions and fights. China will,
however, not want to jeopardise its huge strategic investment in Pakistan and 
will want to keep the relationship in good repair. It additionally has important 
military ambitions of acquiring Gwadar port and securing a large chunk of 
Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK) and adjacent areas.
It is difficult for China and Pakistan in the longer term to resolve their 
widely differing objectives. Their objectives are quite different and almost 
at cross-purposes—while China has a larger strategic objective and views 
the corridor more as an essential stepping stone towards global leadership, 
Pakistan sees it just as a solution for its economic difficulties. 
Notes 
1.	 A. Corr (2017), China Will Suppress Terrorism, Diversity, and Democracy in Pakistan. (Online)
Forbes, Available at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/anderscorr/2017/05/15/china-will-suppressterrorism-diversity-and-democracy-in-pakistan/—662cb4db5cd6.  Accessed April 20, 2019. 
2.	 “How will CPEC Boost Pakistan’s Economy?” https://www2.deloitte.com/pk/en.html
3.	 Asad Hashim, “Pakistan: A Slice of China in Islamabad”. Accessed at https://www.aljazeera.
com/indepth/features/2017/08/pakistan-slice-china-islamabad-170830081303813.html on 
April 25, 2019. 
4.	 “Pakistan Seeks More Loans from China to Avert Currency Crisis “.Accessed at https://www.
ft.com/content/1256ceaa-802c-11e8-bc55-50daf11b720d on April 24, 2019. 
5.	 R. Shah (2017), “China’s Trouble with Pakistan’s Turbulent Democracy” (online) The Diplomat,
http://thediplomat.com/2017/01/chinas-trouble-with-pakistans-turbulent-democracy/.
Accessed April 20, 2019. 
6.	 “Gunmen Kill 10 Labourers in Balochistan’s Gwadar”,https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/05/
gunmen-kill-10-labourers-balochistan-gwadar-170513111330168.html. Accessed on April 21,
2019. 
– 330 – 
CPEC AND CHALLENGES FOR PAKISTAN 
References 
1.	 Abdul Manan, “12 Sites Proposed for Special Economic Zones in Balochistan, K-P”,
https:// tribune.com.pk/story/1026167/12-sites-proposed-for-special-economiczones-in-balochistan-kp/, January 12, 2016. 
2.	 Asad Hashim, “Pakistan: A Slice of China in Islamabad”. Accessed at 
https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2017/08/pakistan-slice-chinaislamabad-170830081303813.html, on April 25, 2019. 
3.	 A. Corr, (2017),  “China Will Suppress Terrorism, Diversity, and Democracy
in Pakistan”, (Online) Forbes, Available at:  https://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
anderscorr/2017/05/15/china-will suppress-terrorism-diversity-and-democracy-inpakistan/—662cb4db5cd6.  Accessed April 20, 2019. 
4.	 “CPEC Mess: Chinese Company Building Gwadar Port Operating in Pakistan 
Illegally, Lawmakers Told”, March 14, 2018. Available at http://zeenews.india.com/
world/cpec-mess-chinese-company-building-gwadar-port-operating-in-pakistanillegally-lawmakers-told-2089425.html
5.	 “Chinese to Outnumber Baloch Natives by 2048”, http://nation.com.pk/national/29­
Dec-2016/ chinese-to-outnumber-baloch-natives-by-2048/amp, December 29, 2016. 
6.	 Falak Arreba, “Angry Balochis Oppose China Pakistan Economic Corridor”.
October 22, 2017. Published in the Sunday Guardian and available at https://www.
sundayguardianlive.com/world/11369-angry-balochis-oppose-china-pakistaneconomic-corridor 
7.	 “Gunmen Kill 10 Labourers in Balochistan’s Gwadar”, https://www.aljazeera.com/
news/2017/05/gunmen-kill-10-labourers-balochistan-gwadar-170513111330168.
html, accessed on April 21, 2019. 
8.	 Kiyya Baloch, “Can China’s Gwadar Port Dream Survive Local Ire?”, http://
thediplomat.com/ 2014/12/can-chinas-dream-of-a-pakistan-port-survive-local-ire/,
December 17, 2014. 
9.	 “Pakistan Seeks More Loans from China to Avert Currency Crisis”. Accessed at 
https://www.ft.com/content/1256ceaa-802c-11e8-bc55-50daf11b720d on April 24,
2019. 
10.	 Saibal Dasgupta, “China to Seal Border with Pakistan to Curb Terror”, The Times of 
India, January 11, 2017. 
11.	 Sattar Khan, “Gwadar—Pakistan’s Impoverished Colony or an Economic Hub?”,
http:// www.dw.com/en/gwadar-pakistans-impoverished-colony-or-an-economichub/a-19185999, April 14, 2016. 
12.	 R. Shah (2017), “China’s Trouble with Pakistan’s Turbulent Democracy”, (Online)
The Diplomat. Available at:  http://thediplomat.com/2017/01/chinas-trouble-withpakistans-turbulent-democracy/. Accessed April 20, 2019. 
13.	 FM Shakil, “Pakistan Seeks Bailout from China and Saudis Instead of IMF”, April 
4, 2018. Available at  http://www.atimes.com/article/pakistan-seeks-bailout-chinasaudis-rather-imf/
14.	 http://www.cpecinfo.com/home (Official website of CPEC) 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on August
1, 2017, and Pugwash India, April 2020.) 
– 331 – 
 
52. 	Brief Analysis of Chinese Propaganda During 
India-China Face-Off at Doklam, 
June 16-August 1, 2017 
An analysis of China’s propaganda effort and its state-owned media’s coverage 
between June 16 and August 1, 2017, during the ongoing face-off between 
Indian and Chinese troops on the Doklam plateau, yields some interesting 
insights. The main features are: (i) China showed little concern for the longterm damage it would do to the India-China relationship; (ii) China’s antiIndia propaganda offensive diminished whatever little trust existed between 
the two countries; (iii) Beijing took a deliberate decision to reduce the room
for negotiations by insisting that Doklam is Chinese territory and accusing 
India of “invading” China and launching a “surgical strike” against it; and (iv) 
there appears to have been a stiffening in China’s position in the past week.
The Indian establishment is likely to keep these in mind while proceeding 
with the relationship with China in the future.
Noticeably, while the face-off commenced around June 16, 2017, Beijing 
went public with the incident only on June 26, or almost 10 days after the 
face-off began, with a statement by its Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) 
spokesman at a press briefing. In the interim, two border flag meetings including 
one on June 20, failed to ease the tension. During this period, China would 
have weighed its options before deciding to confront India. Undoubtedly,
the seriously strained India-China relationship and India declining to attend 
the ‘One Belt, One Road’ Forum in April 2017, have been factors and this 
was corroborated in the subsequent ‘warnings’ and ‘threats’ issued by China’s 
propaganda apparatus. 
On the ground though, Commanders of the People’s Liberation Army’s
(PLA’s) Western Theatre Command who planned and approved the road 
building activity were clearly caught unawares and unprepared. They had not 
anticipated India’s swift and robust response. They would have been expecting 
BRIEF ANALYSIS OF CHINESE PROPAGANDA DURING INDIA-CHINA FACE-OFF AT DOKLAM 
that in view of the already strained India-China relationship, New Delhi’s 
desire to persuade Beijing to relax its opposition to India’s entry to the Nuclear 
Suppliers Group (NSG), India’s past responses, etc., India would restrict itself 
to nudging Thimpu to lodge a diplomatic protest and, at most, follow with a 
protest note of its own. It is discernible from China’s propaganda that in this
interval of 10 days before China reacted publicly,there would have been a series 
of discussions at the higher echelons of the Central Military Commission
(CMC) and the Party as to the next steps that China should take.The strained 
relationship would have been prominent in these discussions as also the 
views of the PLA. Senior officers of the PLA’s Western Theatre Command 
must be smarting after having been stymied by the Indian Army and would 
want to retrieve their dented prestige. Specifically, the Commanders of the 
Western Theatre Command and Shigatse Military Division, both officers with 
excellent records and assessed to be on the fast track for promotion, would 
want to redeem their military reputations.
In contrast to the shrill stream of anti-India criticism by the Chinese 
media and numerous, though restrained, MoFA statements, India displayed 
quiet confidence and refrained from reacting, thereby indicating its desire 
not to escalate matters. Bhutan’s Foreign Ministry issued a statement on the
incident on June 29, and India’s Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) similarly
followed with a solitary statement on June 30, 2017. 
By going public and consistently asserting that India had “invaded”China,
Beijing has sought to use its propaganda machinery along with comments
by MoFA spokespersons to push the dispute between China and Bhutan 
over the Doklam plateau into the background and, instead, emphasise that
Doklam is Chinese territory. It reinforced this by accusing India of “invading”
China and conducting a “surgical strike” against China—protesting that
China is not Pakistan or Myanmar. It insisted that Indian troops must first 
“unconditionally” withdraw. Beijing’s effort to build a case to support its claim 
over this territory in the Doklam plateau is unmistakable and a classic part of 
its ‘Three Warfares’ (propaganda, legal and psychological) strategy.
 China also attempted to divide the Indian political class. China’s
Ambassador to India, Luo Zhaohui, quite unusually met leaders of opposition 
parties, including Rahul Gandhi of the Congress, West Bengal Chief Minister 
– 333 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Mamata Banerjee, Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan and former
Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi and his son Gaurav. He also met former 
National Security Advisor Shivshankar Menon and another former Indian 
Foreign Secretary. Luo Zhaohui’s wife, a Counsellor in the Chinese Embassy
in Delhi, Dr Jiang Yili, contributed to the effort and flew to Bhutan and called 
on the royalty there, including the Queen Mother. Meanwhile, New Delhibased Chinese diplomats met their interlocutors and think-tanks to propagate
China’s views. 
Pertinent in this context was the Chinese Embassy posting on its website 
the news of Congress leader Rahul Gandhi calling on the Chinese Ambassador.
The post was quickly deleted after, as anticipated, it attracted notice and 
became an issue of political debate.The object of reporting the meeting on the
embassy’s website was questionable as was the Chinese Ambassador’s visit to 
Darjeeling at this juncture.
Pro-China ‘intellectuals’, journalists and columnists seemed to have been 
activated with many expressing doubts about the wisdom of the government’s
decision to take a stand, and its direction to the Indian Army to block the 
PLA building the road through the Doklam plateau. Doubts were raised about 
India’s interpretation of the Convention of 1890, referred to by China, and 
whether India’s security would actually be jeopardised, with China building
the road till Gyemochen. Concerns have been expressed too about the Indian 
Army’s preparedness to confront the Chinese.
Between June 26, 2017 and August 1, 2017 alone, 36 articles on the standoff at Doklam were noticed in the English-language state-owned Global Times. 
The PLA Daily, which caters to China’s armed forces, published six articles 
in English. In addition there were 33 in the official English-language China 
Daily. The official Chinese Communist Party (CCP) mouthpiece People’s 
Daily published 21 articles in English while the authoritative official news 
agency Xinhua issued 6 despatches in English.
In an indication that popular opinion was being sensitised to the tension 
at the Doklam plateau, there was a greater number of articles in Chineselanguage newspapers on the Doklam issue. The Chinese-language edition
of the People’s Daily published 49 articles, the PLA Daily’s Chinese-language 
version published 31 articles and the Hong Kong-based China-owned 
– 334 – 
BRIEF ANALYSIS OF CHINESE PROPAGANDA DURING INDIA-CHINA FACE-OFF AT DOKLAM 
newspapers namely the Wen Wei Bo and Ta Kung Pao published 30 and 20 
articles each respectively. The official news agency Xinhua restricted itself to 
issuing two despatches in Chinese.
The tenor and content of the articles differed considerably though,
with the Global Times publishing the maximum number of provocative 
articles warning India of dire consequences. Despite disingenuous remarks 
downplaying the importance of the Global Times, it is pertinent that the Global 
Times is a subsidiary of the CCP’s mouthpiece People’s Daily with a former 
Deputy Editor-in-Chief of the People’s Daily as its Editor-in-Chief.The Global 
Times is equally subject to the vetting and ‘advisories’ of the CCP Central 
Committee’s Propaganda Department as other official Chinese media. The 
articles appearing in the Global Times cannot have been published without
high-level clearance from the CCP’s Propaganda Department. One reason for 
Global Times having been chosen as the propaganda vehicle of choice would 
be the awareness that Indian journalists do not speak Chinese and would,
therefore, readily republish reports from the Global Times and disseminate 
them to a wider Indian audience. It is significant that New Delhi-based 
Chinese diplomats in their briefings to think-tanks and others in New Delhi 
used the same arguments that were repeated a day or two later by the Global 
Times! 
Of concern is the fact that the threats and warnings issued by the Global 
Times have not yet been denied or contradicted by any Chinese official. By late
July, the state owned Global Times had published nearly 20 articles. In addition 
to warning India of a repeat of the 1962 War and an image of a People’s Daily
edition of 1962 being posted on the People’s Daily’s website and circulated on 
the popular Chinese sites Weibo and WeChat on July 12, 2017, each of the 
articles sought to prick India on sensitive issues and has a background. The 
threat about China’s intention to reverse its recognition of Sikkim as part of 
India, repeated by Chinese diplomats in New Delhi, underscores the remark 
by a Chinese Vice Foreign Minister to the visiting Indian External Affairs
Minister in 2008 that the issue of Sikkim remains unsettled. The warning
about promoting insurgency in the northeast, after Deng Xiaoping reversed 
Mao’s policy of “exporting revolution” in 1979, has a backdrop of the persistent 
reports about weapons purchases by northeast insurgent groups from China 
– 335 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
and the clandestine links maintained by Chinese intelligence over the years 
with these groups. The warning can impact the proposed Bangladesh-ChinaIndia-Myanmar (BCIM) Corridor. China, incidentally, has a Consulate in 
Kolkata though it has refused to permit India to reopen one in Lhasa. The 
article attempting to draw a parallel between India’s action in Doklam in 
support of Bhutan and mentioning the possibility of a Chinese intrusion in 
Kashmir ostensibly at Pakistan’s instance, brings into focus China’s links with 
Kashmiri separatists and the growing collusion between China, and Pakistan 
and the pronounced military content of the China-Pakistan Economic 
Corridor (CPEC). These articles as well as the statements by official Chinese 
spokesmen reveal the thinking in the CCP’s senior echelons about India.
The Global Times has also not hesitated in ‘personal attacks’ on Indian 
personages including External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj. On July 21,
it called her a “liar”. Another article attacked Prime Minister Narendra Modi 
and ascribed the “rise of Hindu nationalism” as one of the reasons for pushing
India and China into another war. The Global Times stated, “Nationalist 
fervor that demands revenge against China has taken root in India since the 
border war. The election of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has fuelled 
the country’s nationalist sentiments. Modi took advantage of rising Hindu
nationalism to come to power....The border row this time is an action targeted
at China that caters to the demand of India’s religious nationalists.” Later, 
another article described Ajit Doval as the “main schemer” who planned the
incident and said his visit will not “sway Beijing”.
Articles in the Chinese media have been noticeably consistent in asserting
that “India’s withdrawal from the Doklam area is the precondition for talks”,
that China will not budge from this stand and that “the longer the standoff, the more disadvantageous India’s position will be”. They have declared 
too that “China will make no concessions over the territorial issue nor will 
it yield to anyone when it comes to national security”. Similar statements 
have been made by Chinese MoFA spokesmen. On July 25, on the eve of 
National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval’s visit to Beijing for the meeting
of Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS) nations’ NSAs,
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi elevated the level of the Chinese demand 
and became the seniormost Chinese official to blame India for triggering the 
– 336 – 
BRIEF ANALYSIS OF CHINESE PROPAGANDA DURING INDIA-CHINA FACE-OFF AT DOKLAM 
military standoff at Doklam and asked it “to withdraw its border troops”. A 
disingenuous statement in Chinese issued by the MoFA quoted Wang Yi
as telling reporters in Thailand that the “problem was very straightforward”
and “even Indian officials publicly said that Chinese soldiers didn’t enter the 
Indian territory. In other words, Indian side admitted (crossing) into Chinese 
territory.”
There were other articles too questioning the wisdom of boycotting
Chinese goods. In this context, one lauded Prime Minister Modi for following 
an “open policy” of trade. A Xinhua commentary published immediately after 
Doval’s bilateral meeting with Yang Jiechi, however, struck a conciliatory note.
It said, “Instead of being rivals, India and China have much more common 
ground, common interests and common aspirations. Both, as developing 
countries, need to work together on important issues like fighting climate 
change, protectionism and the financial privileges of Washington. Hopefully,
wisdom will guide both countries to common prosperity. There is more than 
enough room for them to coexist and thrive in Asia and in the world. Both 
China and India need to enhance communication and nurture trust between 
them, first by recognizing that the two are not born rivals and that harboring
ill will against each other is dangerous.” This was the first time an article 
published by China’s official media had used a conciliatory tone and not asked
India to withdraw first. 
Interesting are the posts and blogs that have appeared on the People’s
Liberation Army (PLA) owned or maintained websites. While the face-off
at Doklam did not seem to dominate the military social media, the posts and
blogs on the subject were noticeably firm and categoric. Some of them merit 
attention and are indicative of the thinking in sections of the PLA. At least 
one post authored by a serving and ‘informed’ PLA officer, stated that August 
would be the crucial month for military hostilities as the weather would 
become too inhospitable thereafter. Another military ‘expert’ recommended 
that the best time for China to strike India is in August, arguing that “from 
September, weather conditions in the theatre of combat will change and not
be conducive for soldiers to survive and fight at such high altitudes”. He 
said if the two countries are able to prevent the situation from worsening
and escalating till September, then the possibility of an armed confrontation 
– 337 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
could reduce substantially as both countries would have to withdraw troops
in September.
Other posts on these military sites listed the advantages for China of
“teaching India a lesson”, asserting that this time around, China should 
not make the same mistake as in the past and should “recover” the whole 
of “southern Tibet”, or Arunachal Pradesh. One recommended that China 
should block the flow of river waters to India and especially cited the need 
to accelerate building the planned dams on the Tsangpo (Brahmaputra) river.
None of the postings and blogs referred to any statements on the face-off that
might have been made by higher PLA Commanders or CMC Chairman Xi 
Jinping.
A few posts on the military’s social media did, however, express concern 
at the possibility of outbreak of hostilities with India. Some said the PLA was 
inadequately prepared and not equipped to undertake such a venture, while 
others argued that differences should be resolved through diplomatic channels.
The PLA’s stated position was stiffened by the remarks on July 30, of 
retired PLA Maj Gen Yao Yunzhu, presently Director Emeritus at the PLA’s 
prestigious Academy of Military Science (AMS) Centre on China-America 
Defence Relations and whose remarks usually reflect the official Chinese ‘line’.
Describing the face-off as of “unprecedented nature” that could make Beijing
look for a strong resolution,she claimed the CCP and the PLA are under “huge 
pressure” to take strong action against the “invasion”. Yao Yunzhu was quoted 
as saying, “China and India are unlikely to go to war, depending on how you 
define war. If it is very small, if it is a limited-scale military operation against 
an aggression, it is possible. So, we are talking about very specific military
operational issues. What I want to say is that for this Doklam (Donglang) 
event, Indians have intruded, invaded Chinese territory.That is something that
has to be corrected.That is what I have been stressing.” She added “trespass” is 
“intolerable”. She said that this is “not going to be talk about war or military
operations, limited or unlimited without a context. The context is this—not 
only India, any country that has invaded China (or) Chinese territory and 
stayed on, would have to be dealt with whatever means we have, because we
cannot accept Chinese territory to be invaded and occupied.” She also said,
“Let us be specific. We are talking about the Doklam (Donglang) incident, not 
– 338 – 
BRIEF ANALYSIS OF CHINESE PROPAGANDA DURING INDIA-CHINA FACE-OFF AT DOKLAM 
generally along the border. Because on the border, we have other mechanisms 
(to resolve disputes). We should analyse them case by case. But Doklam is a 
unique case, it is an established border line, uncontested territory. I will not 
say surgical operation, or missile strike or whatever. I will not specify … with 
whatever means, it has to be corrected … you have an invasion, you have to 
defeat that invasion.” She added, “We are stronger. The Chinese military is 
stronger compared to the Indian military—not only in numbers of aircraft,
warships, artillery pieces, tanks, we have a much stronger defence industrial 
base.” 
China’s propaganda offensive against India during the period ( June 
26-August 1, 2017) of the face-off at Doklam appears to have been particularly
critical. Such public warnings have not been seen in the past three to four 
decades and clearly reflect the level of tension in the India-China relationship.
Posts on the PLA websites have been firm in expressing the resolve to defend 
China’s sovereignty and territory. Inherent in China’s propaganda offensive is 
undoubtedly a high level of psywar but China, which has projected itself as a
major world power, will not want this image dented. Xi Jinping has also, since 
he took over in November 2012, used ideology and nationalism to consolidate
the Party’s and his personal power. With the crucial 19th Party Congress 
scheduled two months hence, he cannot afford to appear weak. Other factors 
including the recent tension between the US and North Korea could, however, 
prompt Beijing to defer action against India. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on August 
1, 2017.) 
– 339 – 
53. Different Facets of the Doklam Face-Off: 
An Overview 
The 73-day face-off between India and China at Doklam that ended on 
August 28, 2017, marks an important juncture in India-China relations. The 
nature of the military deployments, kind of Chinese propaganda offensive not 
witnessed in over 40 years, and actions of the Chinese Foreign Ministry and 
Chinese Embassy in New Delhi, set it apart from earlier stand-offs. It was also 
for the first time since 2007 when China began projecting its strength that its 
policy of aggressive territorial expansion had been successfully challenged by
any power. Importantly, the face-off revealed the Chinese Communist Party’s 
(CCP’s) leadership’s intentions and thinking about India. For these reasons,
the face-off at Doklam requires a closer look. 
The Backdrop 
India-China relations have, at least since 2015, been at a crucial and very
uncertain juncture as they enter a new phase in readjusting their relationship.
Since late 2007, China opted for an assertive and expansive foreign policy,
which included enlarging territorial claims and testing its neighbours as it 
pushed to dominate and ‘recover’ claimed territory. With specific reference 
to India, China became more assertive in restating its claim on Arunachal 
Pradesh, particularly Tawang, while expanding its territorial claims to depict 
the entire state of Jammu and Kashmir ( J&K) as disputed and include the 
region of Ladakh. Intrusions by China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) 
increased in depth and aggressiveness.The extended intrusions in the Depsang 
plains in 2013 and later in the Chumar area in 2014, both in Ladakh, were
unusual and almost coincided, or overlapped, with the first visits of Li Keqiang 
and Xi Jinping to India as Chinese Premier and President respectively. The 
intrusions were premeditated and deliberate.
In May 2014, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) led by Narendra Modi
formed a new government. It won the elections with a resounding popular 
DIFFERENT FACETS OF THE DOKLAM FACE-OFF: AN OVERVIEW 
mandate that allowed it to formulate and pursue a foreign and strategic policy
unfettered by domestic constraints or politics. Signalling the initiation of a
firmer, definitive foreign policy that underscored national interest and territorial
integrity, at his swearing-in ceremony itself Prime Minister Modi outlined the
geographic perimeter of areas of India’s strategic interest. This was discernible
from the list of invitees to the swearing-in and visits by Modi soon thereafter
to countries in India’s neighbourhood. In the process, areas where India’s and 
China’s interest potentially overlap were indicated. India very soon energised
and began further consolidating relationships with Japan and the US, among
other countries, with noticeable emphasis on their strategic content, in the
process acquiring enhanced strategic manoeuvrability. Modi simultaneously
clearly indicated to China a desire for a collaborative relationship and enhanced
economic interaction. At the same time, he did not hesitate to raise outstanding
and, at times, contentious issues, like the border and terrorism, with the Chinese 
leaders at each meeting. It was now for Beijing to respond.
Bilateral relations soon came under strain, however, when Xi Jinping
during a visit to Islamabad in April 2015 announced the China-Pakistan 
Economic Corridor (CPEC), valued by the Pakistanis at an estimated US$ 
46 billion and later enhanced to US$ 62 billion. By doing so, the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) leadership ignored India’s sensitivities on issues 
of sovereignty and territorial integrity; discarded the ambiguity Beijing had 
maintained for decades on the status of Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK),
Gilgit and Baltistan; and overtly highlighted the potential fusion of Chinese
and Pakistani military power, thereby directly increasing pressure on India.
The CPEC initiated the process of attempting to unilaterally bend India’s
borders with Pakistan, which moved to fully integrate Gilgit-Baltistan to
‘protect’ the huge Chinese investment in these areas. This it did by getting
Gilgit to send ‘observers’ to the Pakistan Parliament with the stated plan of
later having it ‘elect’ members to the Pakistan National Assembly. The CPEC 
represents China’s commitment and enduring support to Pakistan. Within 
days of announcing the CPEC, Chinese officials began describing Pakistan as 
China’s “only friend and ally”! 
Significantly, China’s commitment to Pakistan was made clear during
Prime Minister Modi’s visit to Beijing later in April 2015—within weeks 
– 341 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
of Xi Jinping announcing the CPEC in Islamabad. It was conveyed then,
and in subsequent months to delegations visiting China for one and a half or 
two track dialogues, including a delegation of Indian think-tanks, that “India 
must ease tensions with Pakistan, resolve the Kashmir issue and then look to 
improve ties with China”.This position holds till now and was reiterated at an 
interaction in early November 2017.
However, in mellower language, Yao Wen, Counsellor in the Chinese 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) on October 18, 2017, on the sidelines 
of the 19th Party Congress, “invited” India to join the ‘One Belt, One Road’ 
(OBOR) now renamed the ‘Belt and Road Initiative’(BRI). Stating that “India 
has expressed its concerns on the CPEC because they believe CPEC passes
through territory they believe is their own”, he listed the “Kashmir conflict” as 
a “top priority along with the Korean peninsula, the South China Sea and the 
instability in Afghanistan”.
There are other visible indicators of Beijing’s unstinted support to 
Pakistan. Beijing has consecutively vetoed India’s requests at the UN Sanctions 
Committee, thus, supporting Pakistan’s harbouring of internationally
acknowledged terrorists and terrorist organisations like Masood Azhar (of
the Jaish-e-Mohammed), Syed Salahuddin (of the Jamaat-ud-Dawaa), Hafez 
Sayed (of the Jamaat-ud-Dawaa) and Zaki-ur-Rahman (of the Lashkar-eTayyeba). China defends Pakistan against criticism claiming that it has itself 
suffered enormously from terrorism and should be lauded for combating it.
Beijing is additionally assisting Pakistan to develop tactical nuclear weapons 
and helping it frustrate US pressure to give these up. China also, in a break 
from past practice, did not hesitate to come to the forefront to deny India
admission to the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) in order to prevent it 
gaining enhanced international stature. In addition to trying to demonstrate
the limits of American power, it linked India’s admission with that of Pakistan, 
ignoring Pakistan’s dubious record as a nuclear weapons proliferator. Beijing
and Islamabad continue to actively collude in blocking India’s effort to get
permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC).
In addition, China is insistent that India endorse the BRI and come on 
board the CPEC. During his visit to India in September 2014, Xi Jinping
publicly recommended that India dovetail its ‘Act East’ and ‘Sagarmala’ 
– 342 – 
DIFFERENT FACETS OF THE DOKLAM FACE-OFF: AN OVERVIEW 
initiatives with China’s BRI and Maritime Silk Route (MSR). There was 
particular interest in obtaining India’s endorsement for the BRI, Xi Jinping’s
flagship project, with enormous pressure—including through the Indian
media—till even a day before the BRI Forum in Beijing in April 2017, with 
efforts to persuade India to send a representative, even if from its embassy in
Beijing. India declined. These strains imposed on India-China relations saw 
the steady deterioration of ties.
Incorporation of the BRI in the CCP Constitution at the 19th Party
Congress in October 2017 implies that the initiative will be pushed harder.
The BRI was specifically mentioned in the communiqué issued after the 
Russia-India-China Trilateral Meeting of Foreign Ministers in Delhi on
December 11, 2017. 
The Face-Off 
The operation at the Doklam plateau in May-June 2017 was a ‘localised’ 
operation probably largely planned by the PLA’s Western Theatre Command 
and Shigatse Military Division with limited objectives. Both Commanders 
involved, namely 63-year-old Gen Zhao Zongqi and Maj Gen Fang Jianguo,
have sterling military records with the latter commended as among the PLA’s 
most promising and “outstanding” Commanders. As per the PLA’s standard 
practice, the annual plans (which include patrols, exercises, intrusions, etc.)
of the erstwhile Military Regions—now Theatre Commands—are approved 
by the Central Military Commission (CMC). Particularly vetted are plans
involving neighbouring countries. In the case of the intrusion in the Depsang
plains of Ladakh carried out by troops of the PLA’s Ali Military Sub-District 
in April 2013, for example, the plans are understood to have been discussed 
and approved by the CCP Central Committee’s (CC’s) Politburo (PB). In the 
case of resumption of the road construction by PLA personnel at Doklam,
which meant unilateral violation of the agreement concluded between India 
and China in 2012 and intrusion into Bhutan, the plans would certainly have 
been vetted by the CMC and PB.
The plan’s limited objectives were to exert pressure on Bhutan to get it 
to agree to establish full diplomatic ties with China; acquiesce to handing 
over the Doklam plateau to China, possibly in exchange for two portions of 
– 343 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
land claimed by China elsewhere in northern Bhutan; and build the road 
through the Doklam plateau to Gyemochen to reinforce China’s claim that 
Gyemochen—and not Batang la—is the trijunction and that the boundary
between India and China should be drawn eastwards from there, thus, placing
Arunachal Pradesh within Chinese territory. India’s swift and robust military 
response to the Chinese intrusion caught the Chinese unawares and by surprise.
They probably anticipated a diplomatic protest note from Thimpu, followed at 
most by one from India. The Indian Army’s action stymied Chinese plans and
blocked China’s territorial expansion.
The 10-day lull before China made the stand-off at Doklam public on
June 26 was pertinent. Undoubtedly, in this interregnum, the situation on the 
Doklam plateau and how to counter India’s action were discussed at length
within the PLA and CCP and between the two.The PLA, and particularly the 
Commanders of the Western Theatre and Shigatse Division whose military 
reputations were at stake, would have recommended a military response. A 
section of senior CCP cadres had also for many months felt that India needed 
to be “punished” as it was opposing China and not endorsing the BRI. There 
was, additionally, a feeling that India was only “asking” for things, namely
settlement of the border, admission to the UNSC, lifting of veto on its requests
at the UN Sanctions Committee, entry to the NSG, etc.
From June 26 onwards, China’s propaganda apparatus mounted an intense 
vitriolic offensive comprising over 150 articles. This included personal attacks 
on Prime Minister Modi, External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj and
National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval. The English-language stateowned Global Times published articles on each of the 73 days threatening
India. Each of the threats had a historical background. In addition to warning
India that it risked a repetition of the 1962 debacle, the articles threatened 
that China would revive insurgency in India’s northeast, reverse its position on
Sikkim and foment internal strife there, launch an international campaign to
disrupt the close India-Bhutan ties and, as India had done at Doklam, send 
PLA troops to Kashmir ostensibly at the behest of Pakistan.The People’s Daily, 
the CCP’s official newspaper, on August 14, 2017 stated that “as of press time,
China has laid out its position 67 times, with the country’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs reiterating its firm stance on the issue for 54 times, while the Ministry 
– 344 – 
DIFFERENT FACETS OF THE DOKLAM FACE-OFF: AN OVERVIEW 
of National Defense has issued 4 announcements regarding the incident”.
There was also a large number of posts by Chinese ‘netizens’ and PLA exservicemen advocating war and that India ‘be taught a lesson’. The kind of 
language used by the Chinese media has not been seen in more than 40 years.
Delhi-based Chinese diplomats adopted a similarly belligerent stance and in 
conversations with interlocutors repeatedly threatened “war”.
This propaganda offensive would have been launched with the twin 
objectives of buying time for Chinese leaders as they deliberated on the
best course of action open to them, and getting India to blink and back off.
China’s propaganda offensive was certainly orchestrated by the CCP CC’s 
Propaganda Department, which keeps a tight grip on China’s official and other 
media, supervised at the time by Politburo Standing Committee member Liu
Yunshun. Pertinently, Liu Yunshun was also (till his retirement at the 19th 
Party Congress in October 2017) the seniormost member of the CCP CC
Secretariat that reports directly to Xi Jinping and which, in Xi Jinping’s term,
has grown to become more powerful than in the past. There is no doubt that 
the threats and statements of the Chinese media during this period reflect the 
views and intent of the CCP leadership towards India.
Meanwhile, Xi Jinping assumed leadership of the Central Leading Small 
Group on United Front Work in mid-2015 and strengthened the CCP CC’s 
United Front Work Department (UFWD). With its increased personnel 
strength and larger budget, the UFWD, since at least 2016, has increased its 
activities in India, some European countries, Australia, the US and countries 
along the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). The Chinese Embassy in India
became noticeably more active since 2016 in projecting China and has been 
trying to ‘win over’journalists, columnists, academics, think-tanks and opinion
makers by offering all expenses-paid trips to China, cash inducements and 
scholarships through ‘front’organisations.The embassy has sought to publicise
China’s stand through the Indian media and create divisions in the Indian 
media, the strategic community and politicians.
During this time, China moved additional troop reinforcements along
with missiles to the Doklam area. Chinese fighter aircraft, Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAVs) and missiles were deployed at various airfields. By early
August 2017, People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) aircraft were 
– 345 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
deployed at the airbases at Shigatse, Lhasa, Nyingchi, Changdu-Bangda, New 
Xining, Golmud, Chengdu and Chongqing Baishiyi. Far from seeing India 
yield ground, China met with an Indian response. At the same time, India,
which refused to engage in a tit-for-tat war of words with China or pay heed
to China’s demands that India first withdraw its troops from Doklam before 
negotiations could begin, consistently maintained that diplomacy was the only
way to defuse the situation, and kept channels open for negotiation.
With the passage of time, it became increasingly difficult for either 
country to withdraw without loss of face. China had for years projected an
image as a strong and powerful country intent on establishing its dominance
in the region and ‘recovering’ territories ‘lost’ because of the imposition of 
‘unequal treaties’ by imperialist colonial powers. It had challenged countries 
as it expanded its territorial claims in the South China Sea and East Sea and 
on its periphery. Moreover, Xi Jinping had initiated the most extensive and 
far-reaching reforms intended to make the PLA one of the world’s strongest
armed forces. China was also trying to extend its influence in South Asia while 
undercutting India’s. The momentum that China had built without being
challenged by any power for decades was now stalled by India! The stakes were
high for India too. Having opted to take a firm stance on issues of sovereignty
and territorial integrity, it could not buckle under Chinese pressure. Its stand 
vis-a-vis China would affect its relationships with neighbours like Pakistan, 
Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, etc. Equally importantly, the domestic political 
cost would be very high.
The Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS) Summit
and 19th Party Congress scheduled from October 18–28, 2017, provided
a time limit for the defusing of tensions. Indian Prime Minister Modi not
attending the BRICS Summit would have been an embarrassment but, more
importantly, tension continuing at Doklam during the 19th Party Congress
would have made Xi Jinping—who had effectively been using large doses of
ideology and nationalism to boost the legitimacy and prestige of the CCP—
very vulnerable. Wang Dehua, head of South Asia Studies at the Shanghai
Institute for International Studies, said on August 30, 2017, that “China
understands the importance of creating a favourable atmosphere for the
success of the summit and the all-important Party Congress.” Indications 
– 346 – 
DIFFERENT FACETS OF THE DOKLAM FACE-OFF: AN OVERVIEW 
that the Party Congress would be held in October had become available
by mid-June. In a surprise, but welcome, development India’s Ministry of
External Affairs and China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs on August 28,
2017, announced the simultaneous disengagement of troops involved in the
by now 73-day long face-off on the Doklam plateau. Later that afternoon,
India confirmed that bulldozers and other road building equipment had
been removed by the Chinese. 
The Withdrawal 
Throughout the face-off, India had repeatedly said a diplomatic solution was
the only way to defuse the situation, but China had been insistent that India 
first withdraw its troops before talks could begin.
In all probability when India did not yield ground despite sustained
Chinese propaganda using language and threats not seen in over 40 years,
and mobilisation of PLA forces, Chinese President Xi Jinping concluded that 
the PLA would not be able to achieve a decisive victory against India and 
agreed to the withdrawal of troops without insisting on the precondition that 
India withdraw its troops from Bhutanese territory before negotiations could 
commence. The state of morale of the PLA—which by March 2017 had seen 
more than 4,883 officers including 86 officers of the rank of Major General
and above arrested and dismissed—could have been a factor. Most important 
was that anything short of a decisive victory would have been a humiliation for 
China, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and Xi Jinping, especially before 
the 19th Party Congress.
Finally, with war not an option, quiet backdoor negotiations offered an 
acceptable solution. But suspicion remains and military personnel of both sides 
remain in a state of watchful wariness at a distance of 300 metres from each 
other, with reinforcements and weaponry in the immediate vicinity. Recent 
reports indicate that China is reinforcing logistics in the area. 
The Aftermath 
Reluctance to accept the decision for disengagement has been apparent in 
China. On August 30, Yue Gang, a retired Colonel of the PLA’s General Staff 
Department and frequent commentator on military matters, quite significantly 
– 347 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
said, “Despite Beijing’s deliberate ambiguity, China has apparently made
substantial concessions in order to end the dispute. India has got exactly what
it has wanted. It was a humiliating defeat for China to cave in to pressure 
from India despite all the tough talk.” There were numerous comments on 
China’s social media as well and their not being deleted suggests a degree of 
tacit official support. Netizens asked why there had been no “apology” from 
India; whether China had given up “legitimate rights such as building the 
road” and “whether India’s withdrawal was unconditional.” Meanwhile, a 
rumour spread in China claiming that it had purchased India’s acquiescence
to the withdrawal by giving it a loan of US$20 billion! Revealing the Chinese
leadership’s discomfiture, separate denials were issued by the spokesman of
China’s Ministry of National Defence Col Ren Guoqiang, spokesperson
of China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) and the CCP’s official 
mouthpiece, People’s Daily. In a widely circulated video clip, the Editor-inChief of the Global Times, He Jixin, declared the people were unhappy with
the ‘withdrawal’. The Global Times of September 12, published a significant 
article by serving PLA Maj Gen Qiao Liang, who justified the withdrawal as
“strategic positioning”. Arguing that “only doing the right thing at the right
time is correct”, he added that entering into a military conflict with India
at this point of time would only harm China. Within a couple of days of 
the announcement of the disengagement, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi 
asserted that Doklam was sovereign Chinese territory and that China would 
build the road to Gyemochen. He was the seniormost Chinese official to make 
such a statement. 
In Delhi, Chinese diplomats led by Chinese Ambassador Luo Zhaohui 
hosted journalists,politicians,academics and others to receptions and seminars,
suggesting that there was scope for “reconciliation” and “cooperation”. Posts 
on the official Chinese Embassy website displayed pictures of the invitees to 
seminars hosted by the embassy. A disconnect was apparent, however, with the 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) and China’s powerful propaganda apparatus
adopting a stance different from that of China’s diplomats. China’s official 
media continued to publish articles critical of India. Unlike prior to the faceoff at Doklam, PLA border personnel exchanged no pleasantries or visits 
with Indian counterparts on China’s National Day on October 1. Neither did 
– 348 – 
DIFFERENT FACETS OF THE DOKLAM FACE-OFF: AN OVERVIEW 
China propose dates for the annual ‘Hand-to-Hand’ exercises between the 
two Armies. 
Future Trend 
The Doklam face-off was undoubtedly an important event which would 
colour India-China relations for a long time. Despite the passage of three 
months, China appeared unwilling to set it aside and move ahead. The PLA’s 
sharp reaction to the Indian drone crashing inside China in the Doklam area 
on December 7, 2017 reflected this. The official news agency Xinhua quoted
Zhang Shuili, Deputy Director of the PLA’s Western Theatre Command 
Combat Bureau, as saying,“India’s move has infringed upon China’s territorial 
sovereignty, and we are strongly dissatisfied with and opposed to this. We will 
fulfil our mission and responsibility and defend China’s national sovereignty
and security resolutely.” The Western Theatre Command said it did not 
accept the Indian Defence Ministry’s statement that the accident was due to 
technical reasons, adding that the statement contained no apology and China 
would decide what to do with the drone. It said India had learnt no lessons 
from Doklam. 
In a further incremental toughening of tone, Chinese Foreign Minister
Wang Yi referred to the stand-off at Doklam after the Russia-India-China 
Trilateral Foreign Ministers Meeting in New Delhi on December 11,2017. He 
stated, “China is also firm in upholding its sovereign rights and interests and 
territorial integrity.We handled the Indian border troops’ trespass into China’s
Dong Lang area in our national interest, on just grounds and with restraint.
Through diplomatic means, we engaged with the Indian side and it withdrew 
its equipment and personnel”. He also asked India to drop its opposition to
the BRI, which was separately recommended by Russia’s Foreign Minister.
The same day, the Chinese Foreign Ministry website reported on Wang Yi’s
meeting with NSA Ajit Doval. It quoted Wang Yi as observing that “ChinaIndia relations are at a crucial moment at present, and both sides need to make 
the correct choice regarding the future development of bilateral relations”.
Days after the 19th Party Congress the state-owned Global Times warned: 
“If, for whatever reason, the nation’s peaceful development is thwarted by
external influence, China will not hesitate to strike back with sharp strategic 
– 349 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
force, or if necessary, prepare for a full-scale showdown.” The reference to the 
BRI was implicit.
A new uneasy phase in India-China relations, which could be interspersed
with periods of tension, has begun. What little trust there was in the 
bilateral relationship has dropped to negligible levels. It appears that China’s 
leadership, urged by the military leadership and especially the Western Theatre 
Command which are smarting at being blocked by India, will look for ways
to salvage what it feels is hurt pride as both countries also seek to find new 
accommodation. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
December 16, 2017.) 
– 350 – 
54. Composition and Implications of Chinese 
Defence Minister Wei Fenghe’s Visit to India 
India and China have planned to exchange a few important visits in the 
remaining months of this year. An Army Commander from India is scheduled 
to travel to China in a few weeks, the first visit by an Army Commander 
since 2015, followed by National Security Advisor (NSA) Doval and possibly 
another high level visit. Chinese Defence Minister Gen Wei Fenghe, who 
was on a four-day visit to India from August 21, is the first of the important 
visitors from China. He is to be followed in a couple of months by China’s
Minister of Public Security Zhao Kezhi, who has worked closely with one of 
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s closest associates and current right hand man 
Li Zhangshu.
The visits are part of efforts to portray an emerging cordiality in the 
relationship, a reason why no other country was included in the itinerary 
of the Chinese Defence Minister’s delegation. The Chinese also took care
to ensure ‘appropriate’ coverage of the Chinese Defence Minister’s visit by
selecting only the authoritative official news agency Xinhua, the state-owned 
China Central Television (CCTV) and the official Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP) newspaper People’s Daily to cover the visit. Chinese journalists were 
instructed to provide only “correct” coverage. Significant, however, will be 
the assessment of the two Chinese visitors of India’s political and economic 
situation including the state of India’s armed forces, which will be important 
inputs for Xi Jinping in determining China’s policy towards India. Both Gen 
Wei Fenghe and Zhou Kezhi have direct access to Xi Jinping. 
The visit of Gen Wei Fenghe, who led a 27-member Chinese military 
delegation which included six Lieutenant Generals and Major Generals, is 
important for its timing and interesting composition. Coming days after 
Imran Khan took over as Pakistan’s new Prime Minister, the Chinese Defence 
Minister predictably pointed to Imran Khan’s public comments about wanting 
to improve ties with India and urged India to take advantage of this. Especially 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
since Chinese President Xi Jinping announced the China-Pakistan Economic 
Corridor (CPEC) in April 2015, China has been insistent in official, TrackII and other interactions that India ease tensions with Pakistan and resolve 
the Kashmir issue preceding any improvement in ties with China. China is,
additionally, concerned that India is involved in efforts to derail the CPEC.
At least four members of the Chinese delegation are reported to have 
arrived a few days earlier and would have held working level discussions.
According to the Indian government’s press release, the Defence Ministers 
discussed a new Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), more joint exercises,
issues relating to border management and decided on greater interaction 
at the working level to ensure maintenance of peace and tranquillity. The 
Chinese-language edition of Global Times on August 21 said that the Doklam
incident would also be discussed.The most important issue of operationalising
a hotline—a proposal pending for nearly a decade—is yet to be agreed upon.
While both sides agree on the need for a hotline, differences persist as to
whether this would link the Director General (Military Operations) in the
Indian Army Headquarters (HQ) with China’s Central Military Commission
(CMC) in Beijing or the Western Theatre Command. The Chinese continue 
to insist on the latter. Till now, however, tensions have been noticed to have 
been defused only after intervention by Beijing.
The Chinese People’s Liberation Army’s (PLA’s) Western Theatre 
Command, which has operational responsibility for the Chinese side of the
entire 4057-km-long border with India, was represented in the delegation by
one Lieutenant General and two Major Generals. Pertinently, the Western 
Theatre Command’s tasks include protection of the CPEC. The second 
ranking member of the delegation, Lieutenant General Chang Dingqiu is
Deputy Chief of Staff in the Joint Staff Department of the Central Military
Commission (CMC) and is from the PLA Air Force (PLAAF), which is 
getting an increasingly important and growing role in the Tibetan plateau, and 
is the most likely to succeed the current PLAAF Commander when he retires.
The delegation has considerable expertise on Sino-Indian border issues and 
three of its senior members have direct experience of the border areas across 
Ladakh and the northern areas of Pakistan. In addition, Defence Minister Gen 
Wei Fenghe, as a member of the CMC and till March 2018, Commander of 
– 352 – 
COMPOSITION AND IMPLICATIONS OF CHINESE DEFENCE MINISTER WEI FENGHE’S VISIT TO INDIA 
the PLA Second Artillery and PLA Rocket Force—China’s strategic missile
force—is privy to high-level operational and other military decisions and is
himself familiar with developments along the Sino-Indian border.
Of particular interest is the inclusion in the delegation of Maj Gen Li
Haiyang and Maj Gen Kuang Dewang. Both have served for decades in the 
South Xinjiang Military District, which has operational responsibility for
the area across Ladakh and Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK). They were in 
position during the major intrusions in April 2013 in the Depsang plains
just before Chinese Premier Li Keqiang’s visit to India, and in September
2014 in Chumar in Ladakh, during Chinese President Xi Jinping’s visit. Maj
Gen Li Haiyang continues as Major General of the South Xinjiang Military
District and Kuang Dewang, who till 2017 commanded the Hetian Miltary
Sub-District (MSD)—responsible for the area across the Depsang Plains and 
subordinate to the South Xinjiang Military District—has been promoted 
as Major General and Deputy Chief of Staff of the Tibet Military Region.
Similarly, though not part of this delegation, Liu Geping, Commander of the 
adjoining Ali MSD, subordinate to the South Xinjiang Military District and 
responsible for the areas across Chushul, Pangong Lake, Demchok, Chumar 
and Shipkila Pass, was also promoted from Senior Colonel to Major General!
Their promotions and inclusion in the delegation confirm that the intrusions 
in 2013, 2014 and thereafter were authorised and these officers continue to 
retain responsibility for the area.
Inclusion of officers from the South Xinjiang Military District and 
Western Theatre Command attracts notice because the ongoing intrusion 
in Demchok, for which they have direct operational responsibility, has now 
lingered for nearly three weeks despite India’s efforts to defuse it. This casts 
substantial doubt on the reported decision by the two leaders at the Wuhan 
Summit to give “strategic guidance” to the “respective militaries to strengthen 
communication”. This was not included in the Chinese statement issued after 
the Wuhan Summit and neither has a single reference to this been noticed 
since in the official Chinese media. 
In fact, the 73-day stand-off at Doklam remains a sensitive issue in 
China. The Chinese people and the PLA remain dissatisfied with the 
decision to “disengage”. The sustained propaganda of nationalism and 
– 353 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
ideology administered by Xi Jinping since taking over in November 2012,
has contributed to inculcating strong sentiments among the people and the
feeling that China should have administered India a ‘sharp lesson’.
This is reinforced by the noticeable increase in the number of military 
exercises on the Tibetan plateau and accelerated pace of development of
military infrastructure post-Doklam. China’s military press divulged that a 
new PLA Air Force (PLAAF) Base was established in Lhasa in March 2018,
that construction will commence in 2019 of three new airports in Tibet across 
the borders with India, and that a new Special Warfare Battalion has been 
inducted into the Tibetan plateau. PLAAF Aviation Assault Brigades have 
also been carrying out paradrop training and “integrated joint operations”
exercises with helicopter pilots for “low altitude deep penetration” operations
in the high-altitude Tibetan plateau.
The continuing intrusion at Demchok during the visit of a high-ranking
Chinese military official conveyed an additional subtle message. Viewed along
with the intrusions at the Depsang plains in April 2013 and at Chumar in 
September 2014, it signals that regardless of high-level visits by government,
Party or military officials, the PLA will remain unwavering in its stated mission
of safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and retrieving 
territories claimed to have been lost by the imposition of “unequal treaties”. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on August 
26, 2018.) 
– 354 – 
55. 	Chinese State Councillor and Public Security 
Minister Zhao Kezhi’s Visit Yields Little 
Tangible Results 
Chinese State Councillor and Minister of Public Security Zhao Kezhi arrived 
in India on October 22,for visits to Delhi and Mumbai, at the head of a 
20-member security delegation. It included 13 officials of China’s Ministry 
of Public Security (MPS) and three from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MoFA). He later travelled to Bangladesh where too he had high-level 
meetings, including with Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. India 
and Bangladesh are both, coincidentally, headed into national elections in the 
coming months.
The visit followed by that of Chinese Defence Minister Wei Fenghe to
India in August and is obviously part of efforts to portray that relations are
improving after the meeting between Prime Minister Modi and Chinese
President Xi Jinping in Wuhan in April this year. Notwithstanding this
and highlighting their territorial claims, Chinese troops intruded into
Arunachal Pradesh just days prior to Zhao Kezhi’s arrival. During the 
Chinese Defence Minister’s visit too, a similar intrusion by Chinese troops
in Demchok in Ladakh was vacated weeks after his departure. Important
for Chinese President Xi Jinping will be Zhao Kezhi’s discussions on the 
issues of Tibet and the Dalai Lama and his assessment of the likely results
of India’s upcoming national elections.
In addition to meeting his host Home Minister Rajnath Singh, 64-yearold Zhao Kezhi was received by India’s National Security Advisor (NSA) 
and Prime Minister. That India did not genuflect to avoid giving imaginary 
offence to China and Kiren Rijiju, Minister of State for Home and Member 
of Parliament from Arunachal Pradesh attended the meetings, is encouraging.
Perhaps to add apparent substance to the visit, a security cooperation 
agreement was signed between India and China. The agreement covers areas 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
like intelligence sharing, exchange programmes, sharing of best practices, and 
cooperation in disaster mitigation besides others. In material terms, though,
there is likely to be negligible, if any, cooperation in these areas.
Actually, there is no possibility of substantive cooperation in counterterrorism as long as China remains protective about Pakistan and seeks to 
insulate it from accusations by other countries. The intelligence agencies of
both countries have very close, long-standing ties. China’s interests and its 
relationship with Pakistan are far too strategically important for any change
in China’s policy towards Pakistan and the current uncertainties regarding the
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) will serve only to strengthen
Beijing’s commitment to Pakistan. Confirming that talks on terrorism made 
no headway, China’s stand on cooperation in counter-terrorism was made 
public at the routine Chinese Foreign Ministry press briefing in Beijing on
October 23, barely a day after the Indian and Chinese delegations met in New 
Delhi. In response to a question about Beijing’s position regarding Pakistan 
harbouring internationally acknowledged terrorists like Masood Azhar, Hafez 
Sayeed, etc., the official Chinese spokesman Hua Chunying emphasised that
there was no change in China’s position, which it has made known on a 
number of occasions. The presence of the MPS Director General of CounterTerrorism, An Weixin would have been cosmetic. 
On the contrary, the Chinese delegation would have again pressured India 
to reopen talks with the new government in Pakistan and resolve the Kashmir 
issue. It would have also emphasised the importance of the CPEC and the 
need to ensure its security.
Beijing’s immediate concern about Uyghurs transiting through Pakistan 
into China’s Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR) are, it feels,
currently being adequately met by Pakistan’s security forces. Chinese agencies
also have a free hand inside Pakistan. China and Pakistan are additionally
cooperating and furthering each other’s interests in Afghanistan.
The other issue troubling China is that of the Rohingyas who, according
to Beijing, are being radicalised by Al Qaeda. Beijing is concerned that these 
elements will cross into China through the porous borders with Myanmar.
The delegation, which arrived in the Bangladesh capital, Dhaka, on October 
26, would have had this on their agenda. China has earlier suggested that India 
– 356 – 
 
CHINESE STATE COUNCILLOR AND PUBLIC SECURITY MINISTER ZHAO KEZHI’S VISIT 
should cooperate in this area. On the other hand, Zhao Kezhi’s delegation
is very unlikely to have offered any material information regarding Indian 
northeast insurgents visiting Yunnan province and its capital Kunming to 
purchase arms from Chinese suppliers there.
The Tibet issue undoubtedly ranked high on the Chinese delegation’s agenda
and would have been pushed hard. It is likely that they sought to exchange views
on the Dalai Lama and urged curbs on the Dalai Lama’s set-up in Dharamshala,
accusing it of infiltrating and carrying out anti-China activities inside Tibet. The
Chinese have an interest in the situation surrounding Uyghen Thinley Dorje,
recognised as the Karmapa by the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama, and
who ‘escaped’ from Tsurphu Monastery in Tibet, particularly in the backdrop of
the numerous news reports—many inspired—in recent months. These reports
mentioned that he was unhappy and felt constrained in India and that he had
acquired the passport of the Dominican Republic. The statement jointly issued
on October 11 by Uyghen Thinley Dorje after his recent meeting with the other
claimant Thaye Thinley Dorje, earlier backed by Shamar Rimpoche, would have
further perked Chinese curiosity. Reliable reports suggest that China made
conciliatory overtures to Uyghen Thinley Dorje while he was in New Jersey.
There is a large number of Kagyupa adherents in Tibet and the Himalayan
border belt and they have a dominating presence in Sikkim and Bhutan.
Clear pointers to the importance of Tibet-related issues are the inclusion in 
the delegation of Zhang Hongbo, Director of Public Security of the Tibet 
Autonomous Region (TAR) and Ms Hou Yanqi, of MoFA who has served 
in its Department of External Security Affairs which also looks after matters 
relating to Tibetans outside China and Wu Wei, Counsellor in MoFA’s 
Department of External Security Affairs.
Zhang Hongbo, an ethnic Han who was born in Sichuan and joined
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in 1985,has been working in the
TAR since at least 1982, indicating that he is either an ‘Aid Tibet’ cadre
from Sichuan or that he grew up in Tibet. He has extensive experience in
security work and his last appointment was as Mayor of Shigatse, one of the
TAR’s two largest cities and also the traditional seat of the Panchen Lama,
till July 2018, when he was appointed Director of TAR Public Security. He
will have detailed knowledge of Tibetan issues including the interactions 
– 357 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
between the Chinese authorities and Tibetan Buddhist monks in India and 
elsewhere. 
Similarly pertinent is the inclusion of 1970-born Ms Hou Yanqi, Deputy
Director General of Asian Affairs in MoFA. An Urdu-speaking specialist in
Pakistan and Afghanistan affairs—her husband works in Afghanistan—she 
was awarded the ‘Tangha-i-Pakistan’ by Pakistan President Zardari in March 
2013. She has served in the Department of External Security Affairs of China’s
Ministry of Foreign Affairs which would have given her insights into issues
concerning the Tibetans and Uyghurs. She is backed by Wu Wei, Counsellor 
in MoFA’s Department of External Security Affairs.
Other issues like, cross-border movement of Uyghurs, complaints by
Chinese businessmen about limited duration visas, and India’s objections to
the issue by China of stapled visas for residents of Arunachal Pradesh and 
Jammu & Kashmir ( J&K), etc. would have been on the agenda.
Zhao Kezhi would have raised trade issues and expressed the hope that
India does not follow the US and impose restrictions on Chinese telecom,
Information Technology (IT) and other companies operating in India. An 
offer to try and redress the imbalance in trade may have been suggested.
An important aspect of Zhao Kezhi’s visit will be the assessment he 
provides to Chinese President Xi Jinping after in-house discussions with 
the Chinese Ambassador and others when he would meet. His briefing will 
be important as it coincides with the building election tempo in India. In 
addition to being Minister for Public Security, Zhao Kezhi is also a long-time
confidant of Xi Jinping. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on October 
27, 2018.) 
– 358 – 
56. Can the Second Xi-Modi Summit Tackle the 
Really Difficult Issues 
In just around a fortnight in mid-October, Chinese President Xi Jinping is 
scheduled to arrive in India for his second ‘informal’ meeting with Indian 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the ancient coastal town of Mamallapuram 
near Chennai. Xi Jinping is likely to combine it with a visit to neighbouring 
Nepal where China has in recent years acquired considerable influence,
the pace of which has accelerated since the installation of the Communist 
government initially under Prachanda. Developments over the past months,
however, make any meaningful progress at the summit unlikely.
China was keen that the visit takes place as soon as possible after India’s
national elections so that Xi Jinping would be the first foreign leader to have 
a summit with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the two would 
be able to build on their first ‘informal’ meeting held at Wuhan in China.
Developments in the interregnum centering especially on India’s robust 
punitive response to terrorist attacks sponsored by Pakistan and the air strike 
against the terrorist training camp at Balakot inside Pakistan have, however,
dimmed the prospects for the upcoming summit. China’s support to Pakistan 
has been overt. Curious too is the fact that Chinese State Councillor and 
Foreign Minister Wang Yi has not yet visited India. It is unusual for a 
Chinese Foreign Minister not to personally visit and approve arrangements 
prior to the Chinese President’s visit. Wang Yi has, additionally, on two recent 
occasions —the latest on September 27 at the UN General Assembly—
made specific reference to the issue of Kashmir and UN Security Council 
Resolutions on Kashmir.This raises doubts about how serious Beijing is about 
the visit.  Chinese and Indian security delegations have, meanwhile, visited 
Mamallapuram and Chennai.
Around the same period Wang Yi travelled to Islamabad for the trilateral 
Afghanistan-Pakistan-China meeting where he held talks with Pakistan’s 
Prime Minister, Army Chief and President. India-Pakistan relations and 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Kashmir were discussed, with Wang Yi assuring Pakistan of China’s support 
and stressing that the Kashmir issue should be resolved in accordance with 
the UN Security Resolutions. Reports state too that there has been a marked 
increase in the number of Chinese military personnel travelling to Pakistan 
since early this year.
This was followed by Wang Yi’s visit over September 14-15 to Kathmandu 
to prepare for a possible visit by Xi Jinping which, if it materialises, will be the 
first by a Chinese President to Nepal since 1996! In Kathmandu, Wang Yi is 
reported to have expressed concern at the large Muslim population and the
possibility of their staging  embarrassing pro-Uyghur demonstrations during
Xi Jinping’s visit. The demonstration by the Tibetans protesting Wang Yi’s
visit added to his concern. 
Importantly, Chinese President Xi Jinping’s meeting with Prime Minister
Modi takes place at a time of mounting difficulties for the Chinese leader.
Dissatisfaction with Xi Jinping and his policies is spreading inside China. The 
country’s economy is shrinking and growth has slowed despite measures to halt
the slide. Hundreds of small private enterprises have shut down adding to rising
unemployment and the number of protests by laid-off workers has doubled
over the previous year. Demobilised and retired military personnel also staged
public protests in Beijing last year demanding reemployment, better benefits
and ‘respect’. The cost of living has also been rising. Students and academics are 
disgruntled and respected prominent academics, quite unusually and at personal
risk, have gone public with their criticism of Xi Jinping’s policies. The anticorruption campaign continues to fell hundreds of senior Party, military and
government officials, widening the circles of the discontented.
The US-China trade war has accentuated Xi Jinping’s problems and 
seriously set back China’s technology sector. US restrictions on the sale of
critical components, like laser micro-chips, etc., to Chinese hi-technology and
telecommunications companies highlighted to China’s leadership how dependent
China continues to be on the import of hi-tech components. Despite initial claims
that they are equipped to weather the crisis, Chinese companies like Huawei and
ZTE are in distress and laying off employees. Chinese President Xi Jinping’s goal
of achieving the ‘China Dream’ by 2021 and ‘Made in China-2025’ within the 
time-limits declared at the 19th Party Congress now appears difficult. 
– 360 – 
CAN THE SECOND XI-MODI SUMMIT TACKLE THE REALLY DIFFICULT ISSUES 
Adding to these problems is the continuing turbulence and sporadic
violence in Hong Kong, which has challenged the legitimacy of the Chinese 
Communist Party’s (CCP’s) rule. Apart from describing the protests as a 
“colour revolution” instigated by the US and the West and making a few token 
concessions, China’s leadership has thus far taken no substantive action to quell
the protests. There are indications of inner-Party differences in the highest
echelons of the CCP, which suggest a weakening of Xi Jinping’s authority.
China’s overt support to Pakistan and recent actions have imposed
additional strain on its relations with India. Beijing’s call for a meeting of the
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) in support of Pakistan to discuss 
the amendment of Article 370 by India—an avowedly internal matter clarified 
as having no repercussion outside the boundary of the state—was avoidable.
This was compounded when a Chinese diplomat disingenuously insisted that
the meeting had criticised India’s action in a statement, which was swiftly
denied. 
China’s official media reactions since Article 370 was amended on 
August 5, have been uniformly critical and, additionally raised China’s claims 
on Tibet and specifically Ladakh. Stating that India “will divide the areas of 
Aksai Chin and other areas of China’s Xinjiang”, they quoted the Chinese
Foreign Ministry spokesman as clarifying “that this practice in India seriously
violates China’s territorial sovereignty”! Stressing that it is by no means India’s 
internal matter, the Chinese media said, “It is a violation of China’s territorial 
sovereignty and damages China’s interests. It violates the relevant agreements 
between the two countries on maintaining peace and tranquillity in the border 
areas, and the leaders of the two countries on the proper control of disputes”.
The articles insisted that the relevant areas “are completely located in China’s 
Tibet and Xinjiang, and … These areas have always belonged to China, and 
under the actual control of China, they are an inseparable part of Chinese 
territory”.
Reiterating China’s claim, the official media said, “Ladakh has been 
Chinese territory since ancient times”. Stating that India has “continuously
penetrated into the western section of the Sino-Indian border to infiltrate and 
create and expand disputes” seriously affecting bilateral relations between the 
two countries, the articles warned: “If the Indian side does not learn the lesson” 
– 361 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
it will worsen the border situation, aggravate the border dispute and endanger 
the peace and tranquillity of the border area”. The articles threatened that “the 
Chinese side will certainly not sit idly by”.
China’s official media has published articles asserting China’s claim over 
Ladakh earlier too, for example, in May 2013 and more recently in May 2019.
China also continues to offer India gratuitous “advice” to ease tension with 
Pakistan and resolve the Kashmir issue. Most recent was that proffered by
China’s Ambassador Sun Weidong who, noticeably, dropped reference to the 
UNSC Resolutions in his interview to an Indian newspaper.
There have been other hints of military implications. Earlier in August,
China and Pakistan held their largest yet Air Force exercise, the ShaheenVIII. Official Chinese military media reporting of the exercise specially
highlighted that the People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) had
for the first time sent its fourth generation J-16 fighter to help train the
Pakistan Air Force (PAF) take on the Rafale fighter aircraft being acquired
by India. A report suggests that the air base for the exercise, surrounded
by high mountains and jungles, was in China’s Gansu province within the 
operational jurisdiction of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Western
Theatre Command. This Shaheen exercise was held after the Indian Air 
Force (IAF) strike on the jihadi terrorist training camp at Balakot in
Pakistan. 
Possibly reflecting ongoing discussions within Chinese military circles 
another official Chinese military media report on September 28 discussed
the deployment of PLAAF aircraft. It suggested that a certain number of 
the PLAAF’s “newly introduced” JH-7-II electronic warfare aircraft can be 
deployed along the Sino-Pakistan border so that in the event of a conflict,
they could be “quickly loaned” to Pakistan. It added that this would also be the 
best option for “cash-crunched” Pakistan to meet its urgent needs and tilt the
balance in an air war in Pakistan’s favour. Interesting is the uptick in China’s
military media highlighting the aspect of collusive cooperation between the 
Air Forces of the two countries. Pertinent in this context is a remark made 
earlier in July this year by an officer of the PLA Western Theatre Command,
who said that the intensified training by formations in this Command is 
focussed “on building its global combat capabilities”! 
– 362 – 
CAN THE SECOND XI-MODI SUMMIT TACKLE THE REALLY DIFFICULT ISSUES 
On the other hand, Indian Prime Minister Modi will be meeting Xi
Jinping for a one-on-one ‘informal’ summit after obtaining a huge victory in
the national elections. The mandate was forcefully reinforced in Parliament 
during the passage of the amendment to Article 370, which passed with a 
two-thirds majority in both Houses of Parliament. Modi has also just returned 
from a successful high-profile public event in the US where US President 
Trump shared a platform with him and Modi unequivocally signalled that
there would be no talks with Pakistan till it took substantive action to stop 
terrorism against India and dismantle the terrorist infrastructure. India’s 
Home, Defence and External Affairs Ministers have separately reiterated 
this and added that in case there are talks, then discussions would centre on 
Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK), Gilgit, Baltistan and Aksai Chin! 
The ‘informal’ summit meeting between the leaders of the two largest 
Asian nations takes place in this backdrop, which limits the potential for
substantive progress. If there is some agreement on keeping the borders quiet
and limited moves to reduce the trade deficit, that will be a good outcome. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on October 
2, 2019.) 
– 363 – 
57. Implications of the Ongoing Tension with 
China Along the LAC 
China has accused India of crossing and violating the Line of Actual Control 
(LAC) . On May 5 the Chinese media reports said: “On the May 18, a 
reporter from the Global Times (in Chinese) learned from sources that the 
Chinese border guards have strengthened control over the Galwan Valley 
area and resolutely responded to the infringement of the Sino-Indian line 
to build facilities. According to relevant sources, since the beginning of May,
the Indian side crossed the line into the Chinese territory and entered the 
Chinese territory, began to construct barriers, and blocked the normal patrol 
of the Chinese border defense forces. They deliberately provoked the incident 
and tried to unilaterally change the status of border control. The Galwan 
Valley region is China’s undisputed territory. The above actions of the Indian 
side seriously violated the relevant agreements on the border issue between 
China and India”. 
China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) troops crossed the LAC and
entered Indian territory some time in late April 2020 in north Sikkim at
Naku La; at one point at Hot Springs and two locations to its northwest at
Patrolling Points 14 and 15; and at three points on the Galwan river in the
Galwan valley where they are reported to have pitched close to a hundred
tents; and at a point called Gogra. They are now reported to be digging
defences, preparing bunkers and moving in heavy vehicles. They have moved
up artillery guns and reinforcements from the rear to their side of the LAC.
Efforts by local Commanders, including Brigadiers from higher formations, 
have not resulted in defusing the situation. One press report said that the
PLA has reportedly stopped responding to Indian requests for flag meetings
under the mutually established protocol termed the “Border Management
Posture” (BMP). These are indications that the PLA troops are preparing
for either a long stay or to build near permanent defences while protracted
negotiations continue. 
IMPLICATIONS OF THE ONGOING TENSION WITH CHINA ALONG THE LAC 
From the time these reports surfaced, there have been clear indications 
of premeditation and preparation by the Chinese. First, the involvement of 
the large number of troops, almost 250, is very unusual as routine patrols are 
normally between 10-30 people in strength. Reports also said that the PLA 
troops were carrying batons with metal studs which is odd, but suggests they
had planned to, if possible, avoid the firing of weapons which would lead to 
immediate escalation. The quick arrival of Chinese helicopters, of which the 
PLA has a large number, deployed with the South Xinjiang Military District 
and Ngari (Ali) Military Sub-District, at the point of confrontation on 
Pangong Tso (near Chushul) points to a high state of readiness of the PLA.
The actions would certainly have been authorised and coordinated at the 
highest level. The entire 4,057-km length of the India-China border is under 
the overall operational jurisdiction of the PLA Western Theatre Command. It 
is the largest of China’s five Theatre Commands. The areas opposite Ladakh 
come under the operational jurisdiction of the South Xinjiang Military
District (MD), subordinate to the Xinjiang Military Region and directly
under the Ngari (Ali) Military Sub-District (MSD) subordinate to it, which 
exercises jurisdiction over the areas across Ladakh and up to the border with 
Himachal Pradesh. The area opposite Sikkim, including the area of Doklam 
(or Dolum), comes under the operational jurisdiction of the Shigatse Military
Sub-District (MSD) subordinate to the Tibet Military Region. While there 
has been a changeover of Commanders at both these MSDs, the PLA has 
posted their predecessors to higher positions in the Military District/Military
Region. Care has been taken to ensure that continuity of local experience 
has been retained at the more senior level thereby facilitating coordinated 
planning. Pertinent is that among the PLA Western Theatre Command’s
tasks is also the safeguarding of Chinese assets and nationals of the China–
Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC).
There are many reasons why China has triggered this tension at this 
time: (i) Chinese President Xi Jinping is under increased domestic pressure,
including unprecedented demands for him to step down,because of his policies
and in the wake of mishandling of the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, and 
wants to divert attention, including when the ‘Big Two’ [Chinese People’s 
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and National People’s Congress 
– 365 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
(NPC)] plenary sessions are underway. (ii) Chinese President Xi Jinping’s
promise of achieving the China Dream includes the ‘rejuvenation’ of China 
by the hundredth year of the founding of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) in 2021. This implies reunification of all territories claimed by China.
The protests in Hong Kong, reelection of the pro-independence Democratic
Progressive Party (DPP) in Taiwan, resistance in the South China and East 
Seas have all created the impression inside China that the leadership is unable
to deliver the ‘China Dream’. Here, in order to strengthen his position and
that of the CCP, Xi Jinping has since February adopted a noticeably tougher
policy with Hong Kong, Taiwan and the areas of transgression are within 
Indian territories claimed by China. (iii) China sees India getting visibly closer 
to the US, especially after the COVID-19 pandemic. (iv) China perceives 
the timing as opportune since India and other countries, like the US, France 
etc., are preoccupied with tackling the COVID-19 pandemic. (v) China has
major economic and strategic interests in the larger Aksai Chin area—the 
Karakoram, CPEC, etc. After India issued its revised map showing the correct 
extent of its territories, China feels its interests are threatened and wants to 
‘dig in’ and secure territory it considers its own. It wants to keep the dispute
in the area ‘open’. (vi) China has not accepted these territories—where the 
intrusions have occurred—as Indian territory but as disputed. Now that it is 
much stronger and India and the world are preoccupied and grappling with 
the Covid-19, China could be wanting to grab larger slices of the territories 
claimed by it. China has, incidentally, over the years been ‘nibbling’away Indian 
territory. (vii) China’s moves would, additionally, be welcomed by Pakistan.
The possibility that Pakistan made some contribution to these moves cannot 
be entirely ruled out considering that since March this year, an Inter-Services 
Intelligence (ISI) Colonel is posted at China’s Central Military Commission’s 
(CMC’s) Joint Staff Department.
Noticeably, the official Chinese media has been quiet on these incidents.
The CCP-owned Global Times’ solitary initial article on the incidents at 
Galwan valley contained strong language not perhaps seen since 1962, but it 
has been silent on the subject thereafter. Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi
made no reference to this in his press conference on May 24 on the sidelines of
the NPC session, though he criticised the United States. There have, however, 
– 366 – 
IMPLICATIONS OF THE ONGOING TENSION WITH CHINA ALONG THE LAC 
been reports on the Chinese social media platform Baidu. Interestingly,
articles justifying China’s so-called historical claims on Ladakh, the Galwan 
valley and Sikkim, apparently from an official source, appeared on May 5, 6 
and 9 to coincide with the incidents at Ladakh, Galwan valley and Sikkim.
Little noticed has been the strong and tough response (May 20) from the 
spokesman of the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi to US Assistant Secretary
of State Alice Wells’ recent statement showing support for India. His 
statement was stronger than that by the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman
at the weekly press conference in Beijing. Chinese Embassy Counsellor Ji
Rong said: “We are firm in determination to oppose separatist activities and
safeguard China’s national sovereignty and territorial integrity. We are firm in 
determination to oppose foreign meddling in China’s internal affairs. We are 
firm in determination to realise final reunification”. 
His statement appears to have inherent warnings against any attempt to
rake up the issue of the Dalai Lama; on drawing close to the US; and opposing
Chinese actions on the border. 
While reports indicate that there has been no progress in the negotiations
thus far, it seems that China is prepared for negotiations. Beijing probably
intends for these negotiations to be protracted so that it remains in de facto 
physical control of the areas now occupied. The PLA troops being armed only
with metal-studded batons is one such sign as is the silence at the official 
level. China’s end game would be for the PLA troops to not withdraw from
the regions now occupied and possibly try to negotiate for a larger area to be 
handed over. Their rhetoric, articulated since April 2013, staking a so-called 
historical claim on entire Ladakh and other areas should not be ignored and 
we should be prepared for the Chinese expanding their presence in other areas 
of strategic importance to them.
But in 2019, the year when Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chinese 
President Xi Jinping met at Bishkek and Mahabalipuram, there was also a 
75 per cent surge in Chinese transgressions in Ladakh — 497 as against 284 
transgressions in 2018. Nearly three-quarters of the transgressions, data since 
2015 show, have taken place in the western sector of the LAC, which falls 
in Ladakh. The eastern sector, which falls in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim, 
witnessed almost one-fifth of the Chinese transgressions. 
– 367 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Appendix 

Incidents on Line of Actual Control 
Year West East Mid 
2019 497 138 28 
2018 284 89 31 
2017 337 119 17 
2016 208 71 17 
2015 342 77 9 
(Western Eastern, Middle Sectors) 
Total 
663 
404 
473 
396 
428 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on May 
26, 2020.) 
– 368 – 
58. China Probably has a Larger Hidden Agenda
 
Since the beginning of May this year, China has created an arc of sustained 
military pressure along India’s northern borders. This presently stretches from
Daulet Beg Oldi in Ladakh, to Naku La over a thousand kilometres to the 
east in north Sikkim, and possibly on to Bhutan. China’s action appears to 
blend military, civil and diplomatic instruments.
 Confrontations between Indian and Chinese troops, or Chinese military 
activities, have been reported from a number of places, including around 
Daulet Beg Oldi, Gogra, Galwan valley, Chushul, Pangong, Demchok,
Shiquanhe, Rudok and Naku La in north Sikkim. Such a military build-up 
takes planning and preparation. At least three Military Sub-Districts (MSD),
namely Hetien, Ngari and Shigatse, subordinate to the Xinjiang and Tibet 
Military Regions are involved in this military build-up. Both Military Regions 
come under the PLA Western Theatre Command (WTC), which exercises 
operational jurisdiction over the Chinese side of the entire 4,057-km-long 
border with India. 
Among the WTC’s tasks is safeguarding Chinese nationals and assets at 
the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). Such an operation involving 
multiple MSDs, as also induction of additional troops, heavy equipment,
tanks, vehicles, artillery, aircraft, etc to reinforce the WTC and MSDs, will 
have required careful planning and coordination, including between the WTC 
and the Central Military Commission (CMC) chaired by Chinese President 
Xi Jinping in Beijing. It would certainly have been approved, if not initiated, 
by Chinese President Xi Jinping who is also the Chairman of the CMC and 
Commander-in-Chief of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA).
There is also potential for additional tension on the Tibet-Bhutan border 
opposite Drowa village in Lhodrak county, Shannan, Tibet Autonomous 
Region (TAR), where a report indicates that the PLA is constructing, or 
upgrading, a Military Training Base (Base No 32) since May 8. Four fighter 
jets and 21 military buses were reported to have been sent from Gongga 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Airport to the construction site of Base No 32 on May 14. Another 100 Army
buses are expected to reach the site this month. Coincidentally, the Men Chu 
Ma village, which is a disputed area between China and Bhutan, and has been 
developed as one of China’s ‘model well-off border defence villages’ is also 
in Lhakang township, Lhodrak county, Shannan, Tibet Autonomous Region
(TAR), or Bhutan’s Kurtoe Lhuntse district. 
Additionally, related civilian activity by the TAR and Rudok county
administrations, pointing to long-term interest in the Pangong lake has
been noticed. On April 21, Dorjee Tsedup, Deputy Chairman of the TAR 
People’s Government and Head of Pangong Lake Governance travelled to 
Ngari’s (Ali’s) Rutok county to inspect the Pangong lake and its environment.
He was accompanied by the Deputy Commissioner of the Ngari Municipal
Administrative Office and other senior officials of Rutok and the Pangong
lake district. Interestingly, Dorjee Tsedup’s instructions hinted at long-term
plans for Pangong lake. He told assembled officials that “Pangong lake, being
an international lake, must receive special care and attention for maintenance 
and improvement of the lake’s ecological environment.” He emphasised that
law enforcement and protection of the lake “is important for long-term work”.
Days later, Rutok county’s Judicial Bureau and the Ngari Regional Customs
and Commerce Bureau officials conducted propaganda campaigns in the
border villages of Deru and Jaggang also known as Chagkang village, not far 
from Demchok in Ladakh, India. They explained the alignment of China’s 
border. In late May, the Ngari Municipal Public Security Bureau revealed that 
all public security personnel in Ngari had received “three-stage intensive real 
combat training”.
 Simultaneous with this activity, Beijing has seemingly encouraged
Nepalese Prime Minister KP Oli to open another front of pressure on
India. Oli owes his continuance as Prime Minister to the efforts of China’s 
Ambassador to Nepal, Ms Hao Yanqi’s and Chinese President Xi Jinping’s 
40-minute telephone conversation with Nepal’s President. China’s action has 
the potential to be a long-term problem for India.
A number of factors have contributed to China’s actions. In addition to 
the steady slide in bilateral relations over the years, is Chinese President Xi 
Jinping’s bold operationalisation of the geostrategic ‘One Belt, One Road’ 
– 370 – 
CHINA PROBABLY HAS A LARGER HIDDEN AGENDA 
(OBOR) in the region with the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC)
in April 2015. Since then, Chinese leaders have been telling India at every
interaction, whether at the official level, Track 1.5 or Track 2 meetings,
interactions with think-tanks, etc., that India must resume talks with Pakistan 
to ease tensions, resolve the Kashmir issue and then look to improved relations 
with China! 
Beijing maintains this pressure on India with the aim of safeguarding its
huge strategic and financial stakes invested in the larger Ladakh area,including
Aksai Chin, Gilgit, Baltistan and Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK). The 
Indian Army’s surgical strikes in PoK and subsequent air strike on the Jaish-eMohamed ( JeM) terrorist training camp at Balakot in Pakistan, together with
the rapid improvement of defence logistics infrastructure on the Indian side 
and revocation of Article 370, have raised China’s apprehensions. China has 
consequently raised the Kashmir issue in the United Nations Security Council
(UNSC) on four occasions thus far in coordination with Pakistan. China’s
large stakes in the region leave open the possibility of Beijing resorting to a
military option.
There is also serious domestic pressure on Chinese President Xi Jinping.
The growing discontent caused by various factors like the abolition of term 
limits on appointments of cadres to senior posts, criticised by cadres as a 
return to the ‘one-man rule’ of Mao, rising popular dissatisfaction because of 
increasingly restrictive and stringent security policies, and expanding intrusive 
Party surveillance, have provoked wide criticism. The economic downturn,
accentuated by the US-China trade war and burgeoning unemployment,
estimated this March at between 70-80 million, has broadened the pool
of popular dissatisfaction. The initial mishandling of the outbreak of the 
coronavirus pandemic at its epicentre in Wuhan, sparked a widespread surge
of anger. Almost unprecedented for China was that the popular criticism was 
directed at the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and Chinese President Xi 
Jinping personally.
 At the same time, the developments in Hong Kong, Taiwan and the 
adverse impact of the US-China trade war on China’s already slowing 
economy, gave rise to the popular perception that Chinese President Xi 
Jinping’s assertive foreign policy was not working and the ‘Two Centenary’ 
– 371 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
goals (‘China Dream’ by 2021—the hundredth year of the founding of the
CCP—and making China a ‘major power with pioneering global influence’ 
by 2049—the centenary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China)
was slipping from the leadership’s grasp. A think-tank of China’s Ministry
of State Security recently cautioned that global anti-China sentiment was 
growing exponentially and could even lead to conflict.The PLA Daily (May 5)
warned that the socio-economic situation was “bleak” and at a “high explosive 
situation” and foreign powers could accelerate a recession and create social 
upheaval. Xi Jinping has, since February, adopted a series of tough measures 
to retrieve his and the CCP’s credibility. These include the pressure on Hong
Kong, Taiwan and now, India. There have also been regular critical references 
to India in China’s military media over the past year and, most recently, at the 
National People’s Congress session that concluded on May 28.
Viewed in this backdrop, the activity at multiple points along India’s 
borders is different from earlier intrusions and certainly tests our military 
preparedness and political responses. It suggests a larger objective—reflected 
again on this occasion with reiteration of China’s claims on the whole of 
Ladakh and Galwan valley—either immediate or in the near future. It also 
raises the question of whether Xi Jinping can yet again risk denting his 
credibility by withdrawing his forces without showing some gains. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on June 
17, 2020.) 
– 372 – 
59. Chinese Thinking on the India-China Border 
Issue 
Recent utterances on the situation along the India-China Line of Actual 
Control (LAC) by Chinese officials—though infrequent—reflect the sentiment 
within China of strategists and academics specialising in international 
relations. While there has been negligible coverage of the developments by
the main print or TV channels, except in the Global Times which has been 
prolific, views have been expressed in articles and comments on China’s social 
media. These uniformly maintain that India has violated China’s sovereignty 
and territorial integrity in Ladakh, that it is building up forces in the Sikkim 
sector, and that China must respond effectively.The sentiments were echoed in 
the recent statement by Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi and the statement 
issued (September 7) by the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Western Theatre 
Command.Two recent articles published by the Shanghai-based official Paper
also reflect this. All emphasise that China will not give up even an inch of its 
territory and that China must respond effectively. At the same time they speak 
of retaining commercial ties with India.
Illustrative of Chinese views after the incident of September 7, were
those of Xu Liping, researcher at the Institute of Asia-Pacific and Global 
Strategies, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and Director of the Southeast 
Asian Studies Centre. He observed that it was a very serious and provocative 
incident and ‘surpassed the bottom line’. Lin Minwang, researcher of the 
Institute of International Studies of Fudan University and Deputy Director of 
the South Asian Studies Centre, described the situation as “relatively severe” 
and said India’s firing of gun shots opens the Pandora’s box and poses a “great 
threat to our border guards”. He cautioned that if China continues to exercise 
restraint, it will “actually pose a great threat to our security” and China must 
have some new ideas about whether it should comply with the border control 
mechanism’. 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi’s remarks on August 30, at the 
French Institute for International Relations in Paris, though made before an 
international audience and, therefore, modulated, are interesting. Omitting
the usual platitudes or use of words like ‘good-neighbourliness’ or ‘friendship’
that he used immediately earlier while replying to a question on relations with 
Japan, his comments on the situation along the LAC were matter of fact.
Affirming that China will “safeguard our sovereignty and territorial integrity”,
his formulation that “such situations are bound to occur till the boundary is
not settled” suggests that China is prepared for the recurrence of such crises.
Worth note, though he was addressing a foreign audience, was Wang Yi’s 
comment that China will “not take the initiative to complicate and expand
the situation”. 
Writing in Global Times (September 8) its Editor-in-Chief Hu Xijin
too commented, “If the Indian Army fires the first shot at the PLA, the 
consequence must be the annihilation of the Indian Army on the spot”. This 
hints at a possible intention of keeping the conflict confined to a specific area.
Of interest is the official version of Wang Yi’s remarks released (September
2) by Zhejiang Ribao which quoted him as stating: “China has always been 
committed to maintaining stability in the Sino-Indian border areas. We will 
not take the initiative to complicate and expand the situation. Of course, we
must also firmly safeguard our sovereignty and territorial integrity. The border 
between China and India has not been demarcated, so there will always be 
problems of this kind. We are willing to manage various problems through
dialogue with the Indian side. At the same time, these issues should be placed
in appropriate places in bilateral relations”.
Pointedly, neither Chinese President Xi Jinping, who holds the posts
of General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Central
Committee (CC), Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC)
and, since April 2016, of Commander-in-Chief of the PLA’s Joint Operations
Command, nor any of the 25 members of the CCP CC Politburo have till 
now commented on the situation publicly. It was, however, on the agenda
of the high-level ‘Safe China (Ping An) Construction Coordination Group
Political Security Task Force’ on June 6, revealing that it is being discussed at
the highest levels of the CCP leadership. 
– 374 – 
CHINESE THINKING ON THE INDIA-CHINA BORDER ISSUE 
After the onset of tensions on May 5, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang
Yi has so far publicly commented on the situation only twice earlier. Once 
after the bloody clash at Galwan on June 16 and, the second time, after the 
incident on August 29/30. Wang Yi did, however, pay a rare visit to the Tibet 
Autonomous Region (TAR) on August 14, where he briefed officials in Lhasa 
on the current international situation and stressed that Tibet’s security and
stability is closely related to the overall development of the country. His visit 
possibly indicated some nervousness among CCP leaders about the situation 
inside Tibet. He was reported to have visited “border areas”, which could 
have included border counties in the Ngari (Ali) and Shigatse Administrative 
Districts. Dromo county in Yadong bordering China and Nepal could have 
been one. 
The absence of comment by China’s leadership and tight control over the 
propaganda apparatus indicates that the planning of this military operation,
which has been underway for many months and certainly since 2018-19, has 
been done in secrecy, with few in the CCP aware of its details.
The statements issued after the meeting between the Defence Ministers of 
both sides reiterated the respective positions on territorial integrity. The joint
statement issued on September 11 after the meeting of Foreign Ministers is
devoid of specifics. It leaves progress in deescalation to negotiations between 
the Commanders of the forces at the border, though it calls for avoiding any 
action that escalates matters.There is no indicated timeline for disengagement
of forces, or whether Chinese forces will withdraw to the pre-May positions.
Relevant in this context are two papers presented by Chinese scholars 
and published by the official Shanghai newspaper Paper on August 29, which 
give an idea of the hardened position on India-China relations inside China.
The papers were presented by Dr. Tongyu Tao of the School of International 
Studies at Peking University and Dr. Zhu Chao, China Boundary and Ocean
Research Institute, Wuhan University respectively. Summaries of their 
presentations are given in the succeeding paragraphs.
In his paper captioned “From Donglang to Galwan River Valley: Beware 
of Three Changes in the Sino-Indian Border Issue”, reproduced in the Paper
on August 29, Dr. Tongyu Tao stated there would be frequent clashes on the 
border between India and China because the balance of power between the two 
– 375 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
in the border area has changed. He said India has undertaken construction of 
roads and camps. Observing that there had been two serious confrontations in 
three years, Tongyu Tao said, “China must pay sufficient attention to possible
changes in the Sino-Indian border issue”.The confrontations at the Donglang 
region and East Ladakh region essentially reflect the changes in the SinoIndian border issue. These changes have a significant impact on the ‘status’ 
of the Sino-Indian border issue and development of Sino-Indian relations.
He accused India of trying to change the ‘status quo’ in recent years as the 
Indian government hopes “to change the balance of power in disputed areas”
and said that “the recent confrontation in East Ladakh was caused by India’s 
infrastructure construction in the actual control zone. In the Galwan area, the 
dispute was the construction of the Daulat Beg Oldi (DBO) road in India”.
Saying studies based on satellite imagery of the border areas show that India 
has set up military bases along the highway, he said, “China should firmly
oppose this”. In a significant observation he said, “In the past few decades,
India has built a large number of facilities on the Sikkim section of the SinoIndian border, deployed a large number of troops, and even built military
installations such as bunkers in some places, constantly changing the border 
areas status quo”.
Attributing accelerated border infrastructure construction to the
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government led by Modi coming to power, 
he asserted that “the reality that needs to be faced is that India’s material 
capabilities on the side of the actual control line have been significantly
improved. In the future, as the comprehensive national strength of China
and India increases, infrastructure construction activities in border areas 
will inevitably increase”. He underscored that “the two sides have huge
differences on the actual line of control. Delineating the actual line of
control is not easier than delimiting the formal boundary line. Therefore,
there is no solution to the actual line of control for the time being”.
Recounting that China and India had signed five border agreements,
Tongyu Tao acknowledged that the “treaties have played an extremely 
restraining role in the recent border stand-offs. Even in the East Ladakh 
stand-off, before and after the casualties on the evening of June 15th, the two 
sides were able to conduct dialogue in accordance with the relevant treaties”. 
– 376 – 
CHINESE THINKING ON THE INDIA-CHINA BORDER ISSUE 
He cautioned that if restrictions on the use of weapons by the Indian 
Army in the border areas are lifted, then the 1993 and 1996 treaties will 
essentially be broken, with attendant huge risks, and border issues will become 
increasingly uncontrollable. He warned that as India’s military deployment 
and infrastructure construction increases, India may depart from some treaty 
restrictions and create a fait accompli that benefits India in the border areas. 
He assessed that the border issue may become the core issue of China-India 
relations for some time to come. He anticipated that after the current situation 
and based on actual political interests, India will be less active on other issues 
of Sino-Indian relations. While presently India’s approach is to gradually
dilute the border conflict and resolve it peacefully, on other strategic issues
India may adopt a more negative attitude towards China. He said that as 
long as the Sino-Indian border issue is unresolved, it will be the core issue 
affecting the entire Sino-Indian relationship and negatively impact other areas 
of China-India relations. 
Tongyu Tao additionally drew attention to India’s policy towards Pakistan,
describing it as “increasingly radical and extreme”. Stating that India is willing 
to risk a full-scale war with a nuclear country and implement cross-border 
military strikes, he cautioned China to be vigilant of India’s behaviour against
Pakistan and advised it to effectively deter Indian military actions in the 
border area, and “resolutely counter-attack any form of force”. 
Commenting on Sino-US relations, he said that though cooperation
between India and the United States is deepening, “it cannot be judged that
India has completely fallen to an alliance that ‘contains’ China. However, after 
the Galwan incident, whether it will make India more strategically inclined to 
the United States deserves close attention”. 
He said that the East Ladakh stand-off has become an obstacle to the 
positive development of China-India relations, but hoped that after it ends,
India will return to the right track and put the Sino-Indian border issue at an 
appropriate position and avoid border issues.
Dr Chu Zhao’s paper captioned,“Looking at ‘Modi Logic’ from the Main 
Actions on the Indian Border in the Past three Years” was also published by
the Paper on August 30, 2020. Dr. Chu Zhao observed that India has launched 
four major operations in the northern border zone since 2017, and each 
– 377 – 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
has caused tension in the border area. He listed them as the China-India 
confrontation in ‘Donglang’; cancellation of the special status of the Indiancontrolled Kashmir region; the Ladakh region military exercise; and the 
conflict in the Galwan valley. Assessing that these border incidents ‘provoked 
by India’ have profound domestic and international backgrounds, Chu Zhao 
elaborated on each. 
He asserted that the confrontation between China and India in the Donglang
area had been caused by “Indian border guards”, crossing into “Chinese territory
at the Sikkim section of the China-India border” on June 18, 2017, in violation 
of the 1890 “Sino-British Conference Tibet-India Treaty”. He claimed that
India’s actions were because it felt China had obstructed pursuit of its dream of
becoming a great power. For example, the attempt to join the Nuclear Suppliers
Group (NSG) in 2016, failed due to China’s opposition; India failed to have the
“leader of a religious army in Pakistan” listed as a terrorist in the UN because
of China; and the riots in the Darjeeling region, which ‘undoubtedly’ posed
a challenge to India’s national unity and stability. India felt that if its Army
crossed the border and infringed China’s sovereignty, it could divert attention
from domestic conflicts and reduce pressure. He said this confrontation would
have an adverse effect on the settlement of the Sino-Indian border issue and 
undermine the development of bilateral relations, but not fundamentally change
the status quo: China-India relations will be normal like relations between major 
powers and be neither intimate nor deteriorate to the extreme.
Stating that revocation of Article 370 on August 5, 2019, by the Modi 
government, had a major impact domestically and internationally, and 
generated anxiety among the people of Kashmir, he assessed that the main 
impact internationally had been felt by Pakistan.Pakistan’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs strongly condemned it in a statement on August 5, calling Jammu 
and Kashmir “an internationally recognized disputed area” and that unilateral 
measures by India cannot change disputed facts. Pakistan cut off trade and 
communications with India, downgraded diplomatic relations, “expelled” 
India’s Ambassador and recalled its diplomats. Pakistan also decided to refer 
the Kashmir issue to the International Court of Justice. 
Among the motives ascribed to the cancellation of Kashmir’s special status 
were that it was on the election manifesto of the BJP; the BJP’s belief that its 
– 378 – 
CHINESE THINKING ON THE INDIA-CHINA BORDER ISSUE 
revocation was necessary for integrating Kashmir with the rest of India; and 
that it was a way to divert the people’s attention as Modi’s government came 
under criticism for the growing unemployment and its economic policies.
Chu Zhao additionally claimed that it was done to ease tension with the 
United States and cater to the US’ intention to contain China; India took 
actions in the Kashmir region leading to regional tension; since China and 
Pakistan are all-weather partners and have close relations and China and India 
are two of the most important economies in the world and share extensive 
common interests, India-Pakistan tensions could compel China to choose
sides, putting it in a dilemma; the more tense India-Pakistan relations are, the 
more uncomfortable China will be and, therefore, if India creates tension to 
the west of China, it will certainly help the United States’ calculations; and,
that India wanted to cater to the US’ intention to contain China in an allround way.
He said that on September 19, 2019, India held its first large-scale 
military exercise in the Ladakh region where the infantry, mechanised troops,
paratroopers, T-72 tanks, artillery, and drones were deployed. He said the 
exercises were aimed at alleviating the pressure generated by the cancellation 
of Kashmir’s special status and resultant divisions and fragmentation in society
which could threaten India’s stability; and for creating a good atmosphere 
for Modi’s visit to the United States as the exercises would inevitably cause 
certain pressure on China. According to him, military exercises in Ladakh 
adversely affect regional stability since “the Ladakh region is not only the 
border zone between China and India, but also close to the disputed Kashmir 
region between India and Pakistan”.They affect maintenance of the status quo
between China and India. 
The conflict in the Galwan valley, Chu Zhao said, occurred because Indian 
troops unilaterally built roads, bridges and other facilities in the Galwan 
valley area since April 2020, ignoring Chinese protests. On May 6, Indian 
border guards crossed into Chinese territory in the Galwan valley region by
night, constructed barriers, blocked the normal patrols of the Chinese border 
guards, deliberately provoked incidents, and tried to unilaterally change the
status quo of border control. The Chinese border troops had to take necessary 
measures to strengthen on-site response and border area control. To ease the 
– 379 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
situation, China and India have maintained close communication through
military and diplomatic channels. “At the strong request of the Chinese side,
the Indian side agreed to withdraw the cross-line personnel and remove the 
cross-line facilities”. Dr Chu Zhao claimed that India provoked the conflict 
in the Galwan valley to divert attention from the negative impact caused by
the epidemic and the locust disaster. It was also intended to “secretly” help the
United States. 
Explaining the “Modi Logic” in these actions, Dr. Chu Zhao claimed that 
in each of these four actions, the intention was to divert domestic attention 
and cater to the US’ checks and balances. In the case of the cancellation of 
Kashmir’s special status and the Ladakh military exercise, India chose to exert 
pressure on China without directly aiming the spearhead against it.
Dr Chu Zhao offered two suggestions for China’s response: (a) India will 
surely continue to pose challenges in the border areas in the future, and China 
should be fully prepared; and (b) China should increase its troop strength on
the border and use exercises and other methods to deter India. The ultimate 
goal is to send India the signal: “Actions must be modest, and patience is
limited!’” 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 11, 2020.) 
– 380 – 
60. China Appears to have Initiated a Phase of 
Deception along the LAC 
Though China’s statecraft and diplomacy have evolved after the establishment 
of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), camouflage, psywar, deception and 
deceit remain integral to the Chinese Communist regime’s diplomatic practice.
Recent developments along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) between 
India and China show that despite the meetings in Moscow recently between 
the Defence and Foreign Ministers of India and China, there has been no 
easing of tension.There are adequate indicators that the imminence of war has 
not receded. On the contrary, the Chinese have initiated a phase of deception 
in which uncertainty and tensions remain high and which is likely to last as 
Chinese President Xi Jinping weighs his options.
Indicators of this phase of deception include the announcement by the 
Lhasa city authorities on September 14 evening of an air raid alert practice 
on September 19; China’s state-owned official media continuing to report the 
induction of military hardware and aircraft into the Tibetan plateau; reports of 
high-altitude para-jump training in the Tibetan plateau by People’s Liberation 
Army (PLA) Paratroop Brigades for operations behind enemy lines on two 
occasions so far and training by PLA recce battalions; the Chinese not having 
given a date and time till September 18, for the next meeting of border 
Commanders; the differences in the joint press statement issued at Moscow 
and that issued by the Chinese Foreign Ministry almost simultaneously;
some markedly opaque comments and an article by the otherwise ‘hawkish’
Hu Xijin, Editor-in-Chief of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)- owned 
Global Times and supporter of Xi Jinping; and the continued silence on the 
subject from the top echelons of the CCP.
China’s plans for conflict are known to envisage a localised war wherein 
it brings in heavy firepower and secures a swift decisive victory. It is presently 
clear, however, that any conflict with India will be neither swift nor decisive,
but bloody and protracted, with damage to both sides. Xi Jinping needs to 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
decide whether damage to the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and him
personally will be greater if his forces disengage and withdraw, or if the PLA 
suffers a bloody nose in battle. There will, in any case, be no decisive victory.
As Xi Jinping ponders over his decision, China will use this phase to try and
put India’s armed forces and political leadership under strain. It will test them 
to assess whether there is any weakening of resolve and whether Beijing can 
extract major concessions. While negotiating the latter, China’s objective will 
be to humiliate the current political leadership.
An article in the South China Morning Post (September 9) observed that in 
the weekend (September 5-6) edition of the Global Times, the latter’s Editorin-Chief Hu Xijin had asked that as China faces mounting criticism, including 
over its aggressive diplomacy and initial handling of the coronavirus outbreak,
and its rift with the US worsens: “How come the whole world is China’s 
enemy? Why is China so isolated?” At the same time, Hu Xijin dismissed the
widespread criticism as misperceptions and Western bias against China, but 
did admit that Beijing had a “public opinion dilemma” in many parts of the 
world over the South China Sea, Hong Kong, Xinjiang, Tibet and the border 
row with India. He then stated: “China must decide whether to try to get its
way as an unencumbered major power, prevailing by dint of its sheer weight
and economic strength—but at the risk of strong pushback,” or “Alternatively,
China could … accept that the world now has higher expectations of it.” The 
statement appeared to indicate that China’s options were still open.
The article by Hu Xijin in the Global Times of September 11, is especially
curious. His comment that “Chinese society must, therefore, have real courage 
to engage calmly in a war that aims to protect core interests, and be prepared 
to bear the cost”, suggests that China is preparing militarily and morally on 
all fronts to defend China’s sovereign territory. At the same time, it suggests 
an apparent unwillingness to engage in war and says, “As long as the outside 
world can feel such true will from China, it might in turn help us avoid a 
war”. It additionally introduces a so-called ‘moral’ perspective by saying, “Of 
course, after all, wars cannot be fought casually, and we must win if we are to 
fight. Such winning has two meanings: First, it means defeating the opponent
on the battlefield; second, it must be morally justified. This is particularly
true for China, because China is not the strongest power in the world”. In 
– 382 – 
 
CHINA APPEARS TO HAVE INITIATED A PHASE OF DECEPTION ALONG THE LAC 
reality this means that China should not appear to have initiated the conflict.
A subsequent comment hints at Taiwan and India as potential targets. It 
says, “We are confident to win on the battlefield if conflicts are fought with
neighbouring forces that have territorial disputes with China. Similarly, if 
there is a war with the US near China’s coastal waters, we also have a good
chance of victory”.
In the backdrop of the situation at the LAC,however, the article seemingly
lays the ground rules for conflict with India and stipulates: “Before engaging
in war with a neighbouring force, China needs to do the following: First, we
must make it clear that the other side, not China, is the one that breaks the 
status quo. Second, we also need to make it clear that the other side is the 
provocateur in a complex situation. Third, we must make the international 
community see that China has made hard diplomatic or political efforts to 
resolve tensions before the war. Fourth, the first shot is fired by the other side,
not China. The international community should be fully aware of this. Fifth,
only in extreme situations, if we need to fire the first shots, we must deliver an 
ultimatum in advance so that a just war can be started in an upright manner.
If we can satisfy these conditions, I believe China can be free to engage in a
war if it has to. This means that even if the US then tries to smear China, the 
international community will understand: China is not a country that bullies
the small, but instead it had no option but to go to war”. 
Hu Xijin underscores that “China must not fight an impulsive war. We
must be fully prepared militarily and morally”.
Finally, retired Indian Army Generals invariably refer to Sun Tzu while 
talking of the tactics and likely battle plans of the PLA. It will, however, be 
prudent to remember that PLA officers are not wedded to this classical text,
but have invested considerable time, money and effort in studying the latest
methods of warfare. It will be especially prudent to remember that the PLA 
has very intensely studied the US campaigns during the two Gulf Wars in 
1991 and 2003 and the operations of the UK’s Royal Air Force against Libya
where cyber capabilities were effectively used to disable the Libyan command’s
communications. Relevant in this context is that the Chinese leadership, in 
the middle of last year, deployed a squadron of its latest J-20 aircraft to the 
Western Theatre Command and has moved units of the PLA Rocket Force 
– 383 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
up to the Tibetan plateau. While the comment in the Global Times article that 
“if the Indian Army fires the first shot at the PLA, the consequence must be 
the annihilation of the Indian Army on the spot”, hints at the possibility of
conflict being confined to a specific area, that may not be the case. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 18, 2020.) 
– 384 – 
61. Chinese Publication Asserts Aksai Chin is 
“Illegally Occupied by India” 
A lengthy over 23,548-character (Chinese) article reasserting China’s claim 
on Aksai Chin and Ladakh and authored by Zeng Hao, Associate Professor 
of the Law School of Hunan University as part of the phased research of a 
major National Social Science Fund-2018 project titled “Research on Major 
International Law Issues in Sino-Indian Relations”, was published in the 
South Asian Studies (Issue 3/2020) of Sichuan University. Incidentally, Sichuan 
University was designated the nodal university for research on South Asia in 
2017 by Chinese President Xi Jinping and allotted considerable funding. This 
issue of South Asian Studies was released on September 24, 2020.
The article asserts that China effectively occupied the Aksai China 
region and exercised administrative control over it since the middle of the 
18th century in the period of the Qing dynasty. It says these are the two 
criteria which determine the legal right of a country’s claim over a territory.
Stating that Aksai Chin is “illegally occupied” by India, it says China must 
further strengthen the control of disputed areas between China and India.
It recommends that China take counter-measures and coercive steps such as 
retaliation and even self defence to “effectively” defend national sovereignty 
and security.
Earlier, an article in the Zhongguo Qingnian Bao (China Youth Daily),
a paper of China’s Communist Youth League (CYL), which has a higher 
circulation than the People’s Daily, the official mouthpiece of the Chinese 
Communist Party, had published an article highlighting the cultural, linguistic 
and other similarities between the people of Tibet and Ladakh and said that 
Ladakh’s ancient Turbo dynasty owed allegiance to the Chinese Emperor.This 
article was published within days of the Chinese intrusion in the Depsang 
plains which occurred shortly before the first visit of Li Keqiang as China’s
Premier to India in April 2013. 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
More recently in the course of the ongoing stand-off along the Line of
Actual Control (LAC) including in Ladakh since May this year, China’s claims 
over Aksai Chin and areas of Ladakh have been reiterated in the statements 
of the Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi and the People’s Liberation Army’a 
(PLA’s) Western Theatre Command. This article too specifically mentions 
that Chinese border guards have since November 7, 1959, been effectively 
controlling the seven posts of: (i) Gul Lake; (ii) Khurnak Fort (ᓃቄ㓣ݻ๑/
(Kù ěr nà kè b~o)/ 33.7667°N 78.9877°E); (iii) Kongka Pass (or Kongka La オ
ரኡਓ/ (Kongke Shankou)/ 34°20Ą06ąN 79°02Ą07ąE); (iv) Shenxian 
Bay (⾎ԉ⒮ (Shenxianwan)/ 35°34’10”N 77°50’45”E); (v) Chip Chap River 
Valley ( ཷᲞᚠᲞ⋣ (Qipuqiapuhe) 35.275N, 78.186E); (vi) Hot Springs
in the area of Kongka Pass (Kyam)/ 䍑ాኡ⑙⋹(Kongga Shanwenquan)
34.30°N 78.95°E); and (vii) Niyagazu north of Bangong Lake.
It anticipatedly stressed too that the Qing dynasty had unified Xinjiang in
1759 and that Aksai Chin, which is located in the southern part of the Hetian 
region of southern Xinjiang, was included in the Chinese territory. Moreover,
in order to set up a military system of government, the Chinese government 
in 1759 set up a Minister of Khotan in Yiliqi (now Hotan), which governed 
the Aksai Chin region.
This article is an effort to build a detailed legal and administrative case 
to reinforce China’s claim and occupation of Aksai Chin. Briefly, the article 
states that the Chinese government officially incorporated the Aksai Chin 
region into its national territory and from the middle of the 18th century
“obtained the original source of sovereignty over the region”. Over the next 
200 years, the Chinese government has effectively maintained its territorial 
sovereignty over this area. On August 21, 1958, India formally claimed 
sovereignty over “China’s Aksai Chin region”, which the Chinese government 
rejected on November 3, 1958, leading to a “conflict of legal opinions or
interests” regarding Aksai Chin’s sovereignty. It said that judging by the 
weight of evidence of countries exercising administrative jurisdiction over the 
region prior to the critical date of November 3, 1958, “we can find that India 
has never exercised administrative jurisdiction over the Aksai Chin region,
and the evidence it enumerated cannot be used as proof of its territorial 
sovereignty over the Aksai Chin region”. In contrast, China has exercised 
– 386 – 
CHINESE PUBLICATION ASSERTS AKSAI CHIN IS “ILLEGALLY OCCUPIED BY INDIA” 
“long-term, sustained, peaceful and adequate administrative jurisdiction over 
Aksai Chin with the intention of occupation” and it can be fully concluded 
that Aksai Chin’s sovereignty belongs to China. Insisting that “India’s claim of 
sovereignty against Aksai Chin is illegal and invalid”, it asserted too that the 
Indian government’s declaration of “sovereignty” over “China’s Aksai Chin”
is not “Indian internal affairs”, but an internationally illegal act that violates
China’s sovereign rights and interests and undermines the status quo of the
Sino-Indian border. It reiterates that the Chinese government has the right to
take corresponding counter-measures against “India’s internationally wrongful 
acts” in accordance with international law. 
It listed India’s passing of the “Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act 
of 2019” to include “China’s Aksai Chin” in the so-called “Ladakh Territory”;
comprehensive additions and announcements of Indian regional names for
“southern Tibet”; and the establishment of administrative divisions in disputed 
areas between China and India illegally occupied by India; as additional 
violations by India. These, it said, necessitate effective counter-measures.
Publication of this article at this time clearly indicates that China will 
not relent on its claims and will probably neither withdraw from the areas it 
has already occupied. Its publication shows also that China began building its 
case to justify its future actions as part of the “Three Warfares” (propaganda,
psychological and legal) in 2018! As can be discerned from China’s social 
media and the very few articles published in its mainstream media, which 
portray India as the aggressive power, nationalist sentiments on the issues 
of sovereignty and territory with India, as well as the Taiwan issue, are high
in China. They point to popular support for military action to take over the 
claimed areas. 
NOTE: Place names and locations at Para 4 have been identified by the Centre for China 
Analysis and Strategy (CCAS). 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
September 26, 2020.) 
– 387 – 
62. An Authoritative Chinese Assessment of how 
China Views India 
Far from any sign of an end to the military stand-off between India and 
China, or that tensions between the two will ease, China’s mood towards India 
is hardening. There are indications that China sees the current confrontation 
as the beginning of a period of sustained, protracted pressure on India. The 
military confrontation in the Himalayas is likely to escalate, with a high 
possibility of clashes occurring periodically commencing from spring this year.
These could include sharp, swift military actions.
China has meanwhile stepped up domestic publicity, though yet limited,
of its narrative on the military stand-off in Ladakh. Predictably, China’s official 
media describes China’s actions in Ladakh as a counter-offensive provoked by
India’s aggressive “forward policy” and as infringing on Chinese sovereignty.
China’s official media anticipates that further military build-up, accompanied 
by the possibility of clashes, will commence as conditions ease in April-May.
Important are two recent articles by Hu Shisheng, Director of the 
Institute for South Asian Studies at the China Institutes of Contemporary 
International Relations (CICIR). He is probably the institute’s leading expert 
on South Asian affairs, especially India and Pakistan. The CICIR is one of 
China’s most influential institutes and is directly under the Ministry of State 
Security (MoSS), China’s external intelligence establishment. Most recently 
Yuan Peng, President of CICIR and an Americas expert, addressed the 26th 
‘study session’ of the Communist Party of China Central Committee (CCP 
CC) Politburo on December 12, to offer suggestions on how China should
engage with the United States.
Hu Shisheng co-authored a 33-page article titled “The Behavioural 
Logic behind India’s Tough Foreign Policy Toward China”, in the latest 
(Sept-Oct) issue of Contemporary International Relations (CIR), the CICIR’s 
official publication. In it, Hu Shisheng was categoric that the “conflict was 
not incidental”, but the “inevitable” result of the “high risk, high yield” policy 
AN AUTHORITATIVE CHINESE ASSESSMENT OF HOW CHINA VIEWS INDIA 
followed by the Modi administration. He attributed this policy to “a desire 
to seek revenge” prompted by “India’s long-term pursuit of absolute security
and dominance in the regional order” and the Modi government’s ambition to 
“overtake China by taking advantages of India’s favourable external strategic
environment”. 
The CICIR article was published in Chinese as well as English. The 
intention is obviously to ensure wider publicity for China’s views of its relations 
with India and the problems in the relationship.
India’s international environment, Hu Shisheng said, has generally
improved since Prime Minister Modi came to power. He assessed that “India’s
geo-value” has risen to its highest since independence because of the demands 
of the US and the West to contain China, particularly in the context of 
intensifying China-US confrontation.This has given the Modi administration 
“more courage and confidence to be tough on China”.
Hu Shisheng projected a pessimistic view for China-India relations 
explaining that “Indian conservatives already held deep strategic mistrust and 
apprehension about China due to the structural problems existing between 
the two countries”. He described the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) as 
a conservative, right-wing, hardline political organisation opposed to foreign
investment. Pointing out that important leaders in the government and the 
majority of those in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) came from an RSS 
background, he stated that India’s political orientation was steadily shifting to
the right. He gauged the RSS’increasing influence from the number of shakhas 
which had grown from about 40,000 when Modi first came to power in 2014,
to 84,000 in 2019. He assessed that the rise of conservative forces had shrunk 
the space of the liberal groups—traditionally comprising diplomatic and
business elites—and “even done away with the strategic culture of swinging
between the sides of China and the US”. He said that Modi had, additionally,
tried to downplay popular opposition by being increasingly tough on China
and building his image as a leader tough on security issues. Hu Shisheng
emphasised that “staying in power is the most important political strategy for
a leader in a democracy”.
Discussing the confrontation on the border, Hu Shisheng asserted that 
“it was India that provoked the conflict by launching a surprise attack on 
– 389 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
the Chinese-controlled area in the middle of the night, seriously wounding
Chinese border guards, while China took a posterior action to fight back
inflicting great casualties on Indian border troops”. He said, “The Modi 
administration has become increasingly tougher in its policy toward China,
hence, building up antagonism between the two countries and putting ChinaIndia relations on a downward trend”. He stated that this “first major largescale border conflict with widespread casualties since 1975 indicates that the 
development of China-India relations has come to a structural bottleneck,
and the time has arrived for the two countries to restructure their relations, 
otherwise their relationship can hardly be resumed”. He added that since 
Modi came to power, China-India relations have every year “witnessed a 
benign beginning and a sad ending”.
Hu Shisheng assessed that India had provoked the border conflict at the 
Galwan valley because “China’s border infrastructure building activities in
that region were thought to pose serious threats to the Darbuk-Shyok riverDaulat Beg Oldi highway, which is an important strategic route for India to 
ensure effective control of the Siachen glacier, which is not only the strategic
high grounds to monitor the China-Pakistan Karakoram highway, but also 
the world’s highest battlefield where Indian and Pakistani military troops
confront each other”. 
Describing the conflict at the Galwan valley as “anything but the end”, 
Hu Shisheng said the contest over the border is highly likely to move from 
“reconciliation through dialogues” to a new stage featuring “contention for 
control with real power”. This will inevitably give rise to border stand-offs 
and clashes. With the Indian government authorising its border troops to 
tackle border incidents, he felt the probability of conflict escalating from “cold 
weapons to firearms” is likely to increase. Hu Shisheng anticipated that in
the course of time “the bottom line of tolerance will become a red line lying
between the border troops of both countries”.
In other words, the two sides will continue to advance their control in 
the frontier areas to their respective perception of the border. While there is 
a hint that both would try to avoid full-scale conflict, there is acceptance that 
occasional fire-fights could well occur. This could, he assessed, eventually lead 
to a mutually accepted border, or defined line of actual control. 
– 390 – 
AN AUTHORITATIVE CHINESE ASSESSMENT OF HOW CHINA VIEWS INDIA 
Stating, “Today, the Indian military has basically controlled most of the 
commanding heights along the eastern and middle section of the ChinaIndia border”, he shifted the blame onto India saying, “Since Modi came into 
power, India’s border troops have focused on promoting the Forward Policy
along the western section of the China-India border”.The incidence of border 
confrontations, he claimed, has consequently increased in the western section.
“In 2019, for example, India trespassed China’s line of actual control 1,581 
times, of which 94 per cent occurred in the western section of the ChinaIndia border”. When China responded strongly, border confrontations and 
even clashes occurred.This, he said, is why “China and India have always been 
caught in yearly vicious cycles of “starting high and ending low” since Modi 
assumed power in 2014”.
Moving to broader issues that bedevil bilateral relations, he candidly
assessed that India and China “were doomed to have a serious collision of 
interests or even military conflict from the very beginning of their independence
and since establishing frontier and regional order”. He asserted this was 
inevitable, “as one newly-born state is a denier of the colonial order, while the 
other one is its successor”. He clarified this as China resenting humiliation
by foreign colonial powers while India, on the contrary, had accepted colonial 
rule and felt it had benefitted from this. Explaining that India perceives itself 
as a “successor” to the colonial power and continues to pursue its policies, he 
said that because of this, “Tibet-related issues and border disputes between 
China and India continued to intensify and even today, from time to time,
these two problems still threaten the stability of China-India relations”. He 
pointed to the conflict at the Galwan valley as the latest example.
Touching on the broader aspects of the relationship, Hu Shisheng asserted 
that more complicated than border issues are the contention for influence and 
dominance and “order in the region involving relations among China, India 
and their neighbors”. As the respective national strengths of India and China 
grow, “the two major regional powers, would have an increasing overlap of
interests in the same area”. 
In this context, he claimed,“Unfortunately, the Monroeist policy currently
pursued by the BJP has collided with the advance of China’s Belt and 
Road Initiative”. With an increasing number of India’s neighbours actively 
– 391 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
participating in the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), competition between 
the two has intensified to involve the regional order in South Asia and the 
northern Indian Ocean. He described India’s tendency to “overreact with 
respect to China’s South Asian policy” as the most significant external factor 
that triggers domestic political unrest in India’s neighbouring countries. As 
examples, he listed the blocking of Nepal’s border (from September 2015 to
January 2016), “dividing the pro-China regime in Sri Lanka (from December 
2014 to January 2015)”, “strongly curtailing the pro-China tendencies in 
Bhutan’s internal politics by intervening in its national elections (in 2013 and
2018)”, and “toppling the pro-China government in Maldives (2019)”.
Hu Shisheng encapsulated that “Sino-Indian relations have been 
disturbed deeply by the five ‘T’ issues, referring to the Tibet issue, territory
disputes, the third-party factor, trade unbalance and trust deficit”. He claimed,
“Different issues have different impacts on their bilateral relations at different 
times”. 
In conclusion, Hu Shisheng said that since both countries face issues like 
food shortages and are determined not to be vassals of major powers, they
need “to design a stable and far-reaching path for the future development”
of relations. Pointedly avoiding any mention of close and friendly ties, he 
suggested that “both countries have to build a relationship resembling two 
cars driving in parallel lanes, each sticking to its own respective lane” to avoid 
accidents. If this is done, the China-India relationship will be smooth for the
next 70 years, he observed.
Another article by Hu Shisheng, this time published in the Global Times 
(December 17), suggested a more negative and obstructive view of India.
Publication of this article in a CCP owned publication will have the required 
high level approval.
The article stated that India’s multilateral diplomacy has become “more 
pro-West and Sinophobic”and that India had abandoned a balanced approach.
Hu Shisheng said India is less interested in multilateral mechanisms in which 
China plays a leading role, elaborating that “India tends to disrupt China’s
agenda in multilateral mechanisms” to prevent them from boosting China’s
rise. He criticised India for not promoting internal unity in the Brazil,
Russia, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS) and Shanghai Cooperation 
– 3 92 – 
AN AUTHORITATIVE CHINESE ASSESSMENT OF HOW CHINA VIEWS INDIA 
Organisation (SCO), but trying to dismantle them from within. He attributed 
India’s withdrawal from the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
(RCEP) to India being unable to play a dominant role there.
He said India wants to be the leader of the developing world. However, as 
the gap between India and China widened, differences between them grew on 
matters such as regional and global governance and “the favorable atmosphere 
for China-India cooperation” gradually faded.
The Indian Ocean was identified as another area where India wants 
to be the net security provider, but since it cannot do this alone because of 
the BRI, it is trying to align with the US Indo-Pacific strategic framework.
Stating that Indian political elites tend to stand with the US and the West to 
launch ideological offensives against China, Hu Shisheng said they emphasise
their connections with American and Western value systems. In India’s view, 
China is its top geopolitical competitor and China-India cooperation on
development and international issues cannot change this fact. Hu Shisheng
said in conclusion that India is no longer interested in small-scale multilateral 
mechanisms where China plays an important role and is instead more 
interested in promoting multilateral mechanisms with the US and the West.
Another article by an anonymous author, but posted on a PLAmaintained website on December 24, claimed the Indian Army is “waiting
for an opportunity to cause trouble next year” and “the conflict may be worse 
than this year”. It claimed that China and India “have prepared for a longterm confrontation in the disputed border area”. Reiterating that China does
“not want to be an enemy of India, but this does not mean that China will 
compromise on sovereignty issues”, it added, “China will at best cool down 
but will not withdraw”. It claimed that because of the “Indian party’s strong
Hindu nationalist ideology”and elite strategic thinking, along with the United
States’ aim to control China, “the confrontation is expected to continue for 
several years”.
It anticipated that military confrontation will resume as conditions 
improve in April and the Indian Army again becomes active before May. “The 
goal of the Indian Army is not to launch a full-scale war, but to try to control 
a part of the strategically important hills through infiltration and sneak attacks 
while preparing for a full-scale war to optimize its confrontation”. The article 
– 393 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
added, “It is very likely that the two sides will further expand the scale of the 
battle” which will make the situation more difficult to control by mid next year. 
In conclusion, it said “India has chosen to confront China, then we must 
also be prepared. It is just that in this long-term game, India must be the one 
that pays the greater price. India will waste decades on the misjudgement of 
Modi’s and Jaishankar’s strategy”.
The publication of these articles gives an insight into China’s view of its 
longer-term relationship with India. Publication of Hu Shisheng’s candid and 
detailed assessment in CICIR’s official magazine is important and will reflect 
the view, at the least, of China’s intelligence establishment. It also implicitly
confirms Beijing ambitions. 
(This article was published by the Centre for China Analysis and Strategy, New Delhi, on 
December 31, 2021.) 
– 3 94 – 
 Index
 
Abbasi, Shahid Khaqan 325

Act East policy 342

Afghan Taliban 329

Aksai Chin region 361, 363, 366, 371

South Asian Studies on illegally occupied by
 
India 385–387
 
Al Qaeda 329, 356

Article 370, amendment in Indian 

Constitution 361
 
Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation 

Act of 2019 387
 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 24, 28–29,
34–39, 82, 132, 160

Arunachal Pradesh 26, 355, 358

assertive policies of China and its impact 

123–126
 
assessment on China’s view on India 

388–394
 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 

(ASEAN) 221, 229, 241, 243

Azhar, Masood 342, 356
 
Balakot air strike 359
 
Baloch Liberation Army (BLA) 328

Banerjee, Mamata 334

Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar

(BCIM) Corridor 49, 336

Beijing Daily 75
 
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) (or One 

Belt, One Road) 6, 14, 26–27, 58–59,

82, 94, 113, 132, 201, 210, 237, 241, 243,

261, 342, 391–393

future implications of 48–52

pushback by US 17

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) 376, 378–379,

389, 391

Biden, Joe

and policy debates in China 246–253

Big Two sessions 84–85, 87, 90, 101–102,

114
 
domestic discontent and US-China 

tension and its relevance for India 

219–225
 
Biological Dominance 197
 
Blinken, Antony 247

Border Management Posture (BMP) 364

Boxer Rebellion (1889-1901) 21

Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South 

Africa (BRICS) countries 241, 243, 346,

392
 
Caixin Global 196
 
Central Commission for Integrated

Military and Civilian Development 8

Central Discipline Inspection Commission 

(CDIC) 1, 3, 8, 10, 56, 63, 72

Central Leading Group for 

Comprehensively Deepening Reforms 8

Central Leading Group for Financial and 

Economic Affairs 8
 
Central Leading Group for Foreign Affairs 

8
 
Central Leading Group for Internet 

Security and Informatisation 8

Central Leading Group for National 

Defence and Military Reform 8

Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs 

8
 
Central Military Commission (CMC) 2,

7, 21, 53–54, 70, 110, 160, 170, 193, 333,

343
 
Central National Security Commission 8

China Academy of Space Technology 

(CAST) 88, 111

China Aerospace Science and Technology 

Corporation (CASC) 25, 205

China Association of Automobile 

Manufacturers (CAAM) 148

China Central Television (CCTV) 2, 23,

84, 101, 127, 273, 296, 299, 351

China Dream 2021 6–7, 14, 21–27, 141,

152, 216, 314, 316, 360, 366, 372

and role of new leaders 53–55

– 395 – 
 
 
 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
China Dream, The (Col Liu Mingfu) 21

China Electronics Technology Group 

Corporation (CETC) 206

China Global Television Network 

(CGTN) 23, 88, 100, 105, 201, 296

China Institutes of Contemporary 

International Relations (CICIR) 204,

238, 388–389, 394

assessment of Chinese Major Country 

Diplomacy 242–245

China-Japan-Republic of Korea (ROK) 
economic cooperation 243

China Machinery Engineering 

Corporation (CMEC) 321

China Manned Space Engineering Office 
(CMSEO) 24

China National Defence News 75
 
China National Petroleum Corporation 

(CNPC)-Economics and Technology 

Research Institute (CNPC-ETRI) 145

China-Pakistan Economic Corridor 

(CPEC) 49–51, 341, 352, 356, 365

and militant Islam 328–330
 
Pakistan, disadvantages and challenges 

320–330
 
China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation 
(CSIC) 325

China’s National Health Commission 219
 
China-Southeast Asia Research Centre on 

the South China Sea 247
 
China Youth Daily 4
 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences 

(CASS) 13–14, 17, 226, 233, 236

Chinese Centre for Disease Control and 

Prevention (CDC) 164

Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s) 9, 18,
 
21, 27, 29, 151

Central Committee (CC) 1, 3, 7, 297

4th Plenum Resolution 127–131
 
Contemporary World Research 

Centre 254
 
International Liaison Department 

(ILD) 236

United Front Work Department 

(UFWD) 70, 266–267, 269–270, 277,

293, 345

China’s ties with US 212–218 
preference for State-owned Enterpries 
(SoEs) 15

Qiu Shi (Seeking Truth) journal 2, 61, 68,

123, 185, 188–189, 204, 263

call to protect Xi Jinping 178–182
Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP’s)

Congress meeting

18th 7, 56

19th
 
analysis of 67–73

initial assessment 56–66
 
internal situation before 7–14
 
new leaders role in China Dream 53– 

55
 
no change in policy towards Tibet 

265–268
 
Chinese Institutes of Contemporary 

International Research (CICIR) 233,

236
 
Chinese People’s Political Consultative 

Conference (CPPCC) 22, 101, 123, 149,

158, 172, 219, 253, 295

3rd Session of 13th (2020) 84–89

Plenary Session (2019), initial 

assessment of 79–83
 
Chuanzhi, Liu 18, 153

Communist Party of the Soviet Union 

(CPSU) 8

Communist Youth League (CYL) 10, 90,

385
 
Community of Common Destiny (idea 

of ) 22

Conference on Diplomacy Around China 
in the Context of the Coronavirus 
254–259 
Constitution of People’s Republic of China 

(PRC) 178

amendment on abolition of two-term of 

President and Vice President 1–2
 
coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic 

16–17, 108, 112, 137, 253

China and post Covid-19 world 194–199
economic revival, difficulties in 153–159
and its impact on Chinese economy 
143–152 
Cross Border Interbank Payment System 

(CIPS) 232

Cultural Revolution 15, 54, 69, 140, 158,

169, 171, 267
 
– 396 – 
INDEX 
Dalai Lama 63, 125, 266, 270, 291, 293,

367
 
Democratic Progressive Party (DPP),

Taiwan 64, 366

victory in elections and its repercussions 

on China 314–317
 
Digital Silk Route 27

diplomatic constituency 23–24

Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) 

attacks 310
 
Djibouti Safeguard Base project 204–205

domestic campaign 25

Doval, Ajit 336–337, 344, 349, 351
 
Earth-Moon Economic Zone 25
 
East Asian Model 255
 
East Sea or Sea of Japan 26, 43
 
Fenghe, Wei 55, 70, 98, 110

visit to India, composition and 

implications 351–354
 
G-20 244
 
Gandhi, Rahul 333–334

Global Counter-Terrorism Forum 241
 
Global Interbank Financial 

Telecommunications Association 
(SWIFT) 232, 240

Gogoi, Gaurav 334

Gogoi, Tarun 334

Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution 

(GPCR) 75

Guangxi-Zhuang Autonomous Region 

169
 
Gwadar port 323–325, 330
 
Harkat-ul-Mujahideen (HuM) 329

Head of the Hongkong Macao Affairs 

Office (HKMAO) 174

Hebei Far East Communication System 

Engineering 205–206

He, Liu 3

hidden agenda of China 369–372

hi-tech research
 
Civil-Military Fusion Programme (or 

Civil-Military Integration) 28–34, 207

decline in workforce 29
 
factory robots 29

fifth generation (5G) communication 

technology 16, 25–26, 28–29, 39–42,

194
 
upgradation of manpower skills 29

Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office 

(HKMAO) 86

Hong Kong Special Administrative 

Region (HKSAR) 112–113, 129–130,

174, 233, 317
 
Ing-wen, Tsai 314–317
internal situation in China
 
criticism of Xi Jinping 19–20

economic protests 18

military reforms 15–16

modernisation due to US technology 

16–17
 
social stability 15

International Civil Aviation Organisation 
(ICAO) 244–245

International Monetary Fund (IMF) 330

international situation, Chinese 

assessments of 236–241
 
Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) 329

Islamic State 329
 
Jaish-e-Mohammed 342
 
Jamaat-ud-Dawaa 342
 
Jammu & Kashmir ( J&K) 26, 358

Japan Air Self-Defence Force ( JASDF) 

195
 
Jiabao, Wen 158

Jinping, Xi

campaign to entrench CCP among 
people 260–264
dissatisfaction and discontent with 
132–136, 160–166
efforts to consolidate Marxist ideology 
among CCP 188–193
faced public criticism due to 
mishandling of coronavirus epidemic 
171–172 
inner-party differences on Hong Kong 
issue 308–313 
public protests on credibility of 137–142
reaction to inner party opposition 
167–170 
Yan’an style campaign 183–187
Jintao, Hu 130
 
– 397 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Jiyun, Tian 158
 
Keqiang, Li 10, 20, 50, 53–54, 80, 89,

91–93, 105–106, 113, 155, 158, 241, 305,

322, 324

Kezhi, Zhao 87, 91, 110, 129, 169, 186,

191, 232, 351, 355–358

Khan, Imran 322, 325–326
 
Ladakh 26, 51, 125, 286, 292, 340, 343,

352–353, 355, 361–362, 388

Lashkar-e Jhangvi 328

Lashkar-e-Tayyeba (LeT) 329, 342

Liangshan Yi Autonomous Prefecture 107

Lianhe Zaobao 148
 
LIHKG online discussion forum 310
 
Line of Actual Control (LAC) 225

China initiated phase of deception along 

381–384
 
Chinese officials thinking on dispute

373–380
 
Chinese personnel demonstration at

Demchok 125
 
Doklam stand-off (China and India)

100, 125

Chinese propaganda during 332–339

different facets of 340–350
 
Galwan Valley clashes 364, 367, 375,

379, 390

implications for India for ongoing 

tensions at 364–368
 
Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture 107
 
Made in China-2025 16, 22, 27, 30, 41, 94,

141, 205, 207, 260–261

magazine/newspaper

Changjiang Daily 164
 
China Daily 105, 136, 248–249, 308, 321

China in Perspective 158
 
China-Tibet Net 300–301

 Dawn 325–326

 Duowei 306
 
Duo Wei News (DW News) 308
 
Epoch Times 309
 
Foreign Affairs 248
 
Global Times 5, 17, 72, 98, 108, 115, 203,

222–224, 231, 234, 251, 269, 274–275,

311, 324, 334–336, 344, 348, 364,
 
373–374, 381–382

Mainland China 103, 219
 
Ming Pao News 310–311
 
New York Times 248, 312

Oriental Daily News 309
 
Paper, The 147, 157, 309, 375, 377

People Magazine 163, 173
 
People’s Daily 2, 57, 61, 67–68, 83, 97,

106, 133, 186–187, 191, 204, 209, 224,

297–298, 306, 334–335, 348

PLA Daily 5, 9–10, 17, 118, 175,

202–203, 334

Sing Pao Daily News 309
 
South China Morning Post 35, 37, 104,

133, 152, 217, 234, 250, 382

Southern Weekly 163, 173
 
Ta Kung Pao 309, 335
 
Tibet Daily 277
 
Wall Street Journal 164, 250, 280
 
Wen Wei Bo 335
 
Wen Wei Po 309
 
Zhejiang Ribao 374
 
maritime challenge, in Indo-Pacific 43–47

Maritime Silk Route or Road (MSR) 27,

318, 343

Mars, landing on 24–25

Menon, Shivshankar 334

Mingfu, Liu 26

Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) 94,

100, 183

Collaborative Innovation Centre 254
 
Modi, Narendra 243, 336, 340–342, 346,

367, 376, 389–390
 
National Defence Mobilisation 

Department (NDMD) 75

National Development and Reform 

Commission (NDRC) 155

National Institute for South China Sea 

Studies 247
 
National People’s Congress (NPC) 1, 5, 11,

14–15, 54, 62, 79, 134, 140, 171

assessment of Second Plenum of 13th 

90–113
 
and military of China 114–122

National Radio and Television 

Administration (NRTA) 231
 
– 398 – 
 
 
 
INDEX 
National Security Commission (NSC) 168

National Security Education Campaign 

2016 12–13
 
National Supervisory Commission 168

Nei Mongol Autonomous Region. Xinhua 

109
 
New Highland of War 197
 
Norbu, Gyaltsen 13

Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) 333, 342,

378
 
Nujiang Lisu Autonomous Prefecture 107
 
Obama, Barack 207, 319

One Belt and One Road (OBOR) 204,

221–222, 318–319, 332, 342

Organisation of Petroleum Exporting 

Countries (OPEC) 156
 
Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK) 330, 363

Party and Public Security Personnel (PSP) 

132
 
Party Plenum 3rd (2013) 8, 10

People’s Armed Police (PAP) 13, 86, 97,

168, 170, 174, 310

People’s Armed Police Force (PAPF) 57,
 
80
 
People’s Association for Friendship with 

Foreign Countries (PAFFC). 247

People’s Bank of China (PBoC) 11, 17,
 
148
 
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) 3–4, 8–9,

13, 16, 97, 100, 146, 165–166, 170, 279,

310, 320, 393–394

Air Force (PLAAF) 26, 55, 67, 124–125,

195, 230, 345, 352, 354, 362

Army Navy (PLAN) 51, 55, 67,

123–124, 206, 274, 315

current equipment status of 45–46

developing aviation wing 46–47

rise as global naval power 43–45

comments by deputies to NPC 118–122

 dismantled military-political 

coordination mechanism 75
 
emphasis on professionalisation of 76

National Defence University (NDU) 21

 Navy 26

 officers 77–78
 
priorities of 74
 
under purview of Central Discipline 

Inspection Commission (CDIC) 74

Rocket Force (earlier Second Artillery) 

26, 55, 114–115, 353, 383–384

Strategic Support Force (SSF) 116

Western Theatre Command 320,

332–333, 352, 362, 373

People’s Republic of China (PRC) 7–8
Politburo (PB) 15, 53, 67, 183, 308

Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) 3,

15, 53–54, 67, 80, 97, 127, 144, 155, 183,

194, 295, 308

Political and Legal Affairs Commission 
(PLAC) 169, 184–185
poverty alleviation 107

Provincial People’s Association for 

Friendship with Foreign Countries 

(PAFFC) 217

Public Security Bureau (PSB) 183
 
Qili, Hu 158

Qishan, Wang 3, 56, 63, 89, 127

quantum technologies 24
 
Red Descendants 1, 25

Regional Comprehensive Economic 

Partnership (RCEP) 243, 249, 393

researchers in China, recommendation for 
stable relationship with US 226–229
Rijiju, Kiren 355

Rohingyas 14

RSS 389
 
Ruihuan, Li 158
 
Safe China Construction Coordinating 

Small Group 167–170, 185

Sagarmala 342

Salahuddin, Syed 342

Sayed, Hafez 342

Sayeed, Hafez 329, 356

Science of Military Strategy 197
 
second summit between Xi-Modi 359–363 
Senkaku Islands or Diaoyu Islands 26

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 

(SARS) outbreak (2003) 146, 197

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation 
(SCO) 241, 393–394
Shilin, Zhao 18
 
– 399 – 
XI JINPING: CHINA’S THIRD NEW ERA 
Sina 4
 
Sino-British Conference Tibet-India 

Treaty 1890 378

Sino-Indian War of 1962 23
 
Social Credit Management system 12

South China Sea (SCS) 14, 26, 43, 48, 64,

123, 226, 243

South China Sea Strategic Situation 

Probing Initiative (SCSPI) 231

Sullivan, Jake 247

Swaraj, Sushma 336, 344
 
Tehreek-e Taliban 328
 
Tibetan Buddhist monks 13
 
Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) 27, 54,

69, 76, 80, 87, 97, 107, 110, 265, 307

China and US emerge as adversaries on

issue of 291–294
 
China’s efforts to diminish and 

undermine Dalai Lama influence 

274–278
 
expenditure on public security 279–284

National Security Council (NSC) 302

Public Security Bureau (PSB) 13

receiving priority in recent months 

269–273

 xiaokang (well-off ) border defence 

villages in 285–290

Tibet Work Forum
 
Seventh in 2020 295–302
 
Sixth in 2015 300
 
trade war between US-China 16, 92, 123,

132, 172, 246, 260

fall-out in China 207–211
 
strategic move by US 200–206

tension within Chinese leadership and 

pressure created by US 230–235

Trump, Donald 14, 46, 126, 194, 196, 200,

203, 226–227, 230, 242, 253, 260

Tsinghua University Research Centre for 

Strategy and Security 226
 
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 

159, 175, 199, 342, 361

United States of America
 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Development 256

National Security Strategy (NSS) 2017 

103
 
Un, Kim Jong 243

Unrestricted Warfare 197, 216, 247

US Indo-Pacific strategic framework 393
 
Vijayan, Pinarayi 334
 
Wangzhou, Meng 16

WeChat 4–5, 166, 174, 220, 335

WeiBo 220
 
Weibo 4, 112–113, 135, 140, 212, 214, 220,

335
 
White Paper on China’s National Defence 

in the New Era 125
 
World Bank 330
 
World Health Organisation (WHO) 145,

194–195, 199, 244

World Trade Organisation (WTO) 202
 
Xiaonian, Xu 17

Xiaoping, Deng 2, 8, 61, 80, 105, 130, 158,

178, 245–246, 262, 335

Xinjiang Production and Construction 
Corps (XPCC or Bingtuan) 303–304
Xinjiang-Uyghur Autonomous Region 

(XUAR) 13–14, 27, 80, 87, 107, 233,

265, 356

Central Xinjiang Work Symposium 

(Third) 2020 303–307

Xuefeng, Ren 128
 
Yang, Wang 20

Year of the Rat 253
 
Yi, Wang 62, 99, 115, 145, 194, 223,

234–235, 248, 336, 359–360, 366, 374

Yun, Ma (‘Jack’ Ma) 18, 153, 173
 
Zaki-ur-Rahman 342
 
Zedong, Mao 2, 5, 8, 29, 54, 61, 105,

130–131, 178, 180, 188, 245, 262

Zemin, Jiang 130

Zhangrun, Xu 18–19
Zhanshu, Li 3

Zheng, Han 20

Zhiqiang, Ren 158

Zhongxun, Xi 2

Zijing Magazine 216
 
zero-sum theory of trade of America 202
 
– 400 – 