QUESTION NO.604 DISCUSSION ON INDIA CHINA BORDER
 September 16, 2020

LOK SABHA
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO.604
TO BE ANSWERED ON 16.09.2020

DISCUSSION ON INDIA CHINA BORDER

604. SHRI KAUSHALENDRA KUMAR:
SHRI RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS LALAN SINGH:

Will the Minister of External Affairs be pleased to state:

(a) whether the Government has started any bilateral discussion with China about recent tension on Indo-China border;

(b) if so, the details in this regard;

(c) whether the Government has any plan to start dialogue with China Government to reduce tension on border area; and

(d) if so, the details thereof?

ANSWER
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
[SHRI V. MURALEEDHARAN]

(a) to (d) From April-May this year, there has been an enhanced deployment of troops and armaments by the Chinese side in the border areas and along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in the Western Sector. Since mid-May the Chinese side attempted to transgress the LAC in several areas of the Western Sector of the India-China border area. These attempts were invariably met with an appropriate response from us.

To address the issues arising from such attempts, the two sides engaged in discussions through the established military and diplomatic channels. A meeting of the Senior Commanders took place on 6 June 2020 and the two sides had agreed on a process for disengagement. Subsequently, ground commanders had a series of meetings to implement the consensus reached at a higher level. However, the Chinese side departed from this consensus to respect the LAC and tried to unilaterally change the status quo, as a result of which a violent face-off happened in the late evening and night of 15 June 2020. Both sides suffered casualties that could have been avoided had the agreement at the Senior Commanders level been scrupulously followed by the Chinese side.

After the violent faceoff at Galwan valley, the two sides continued their engagements to comprehensively address the issues arising due to these developments. The Senior Military Commanders of India and China have further held four meetings thereafter on 22 June, 30 June, 14 July and 2 August 2020. The two sides have also had four meetings of the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on India-China border affairs (WMCC) on 24 June, 10 July, 24 July and 20 August 2020.

Separately, immediately after the incident in Galwan valley, External Affairs Minister had spoken to Foreign Minister of China, on 17 June 2020. Subsequently the Special Representatives of India and China on the Boundary Question also had a telephone conversation on 5 July 2020. It was agreed that both sides should work towards complete disengagement at the earliest and de-escalation in the India-China border areas so as to restore full peace and tranquillity in the border areas.

Raksha Mantri met his Chinese counterpart on 4 September 2020 in Moscow. Raksha Mantri conveyed that the two sides should resolve the ongoing situation and outstanding issues in the border areas peacefully through dialogue.

External Affairs Minister met Foreign Minister of China on 10 September 2020 in Moscow. Both Ministers had in-depth discussions on the developments in the India-China border areas and reached an agreement on the following five points:

(i) Both sides should take guidance from the series of consensus of the leaders on developing India-China relations, including not allowing differences to become disputes.

(ii) The current situation in the border areas is not in the interest of either side. They agreed therefore that the border troops of both sides should continue their dialogue, quickly disengage, maintain proper distance and ease tensions.

(iii) Both sides shall abide by all the existing agreements and protocol on China-India boundary affairs, maintain peace and tranquillity in the border areas and avoid any action that could escalate matters.

(iv) Continue to have dialogue and communication through the Special Representative mechanism on the India-China boundary question. They also agreed in this context that the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on India-China Border Affairs (WMCC) should also continue its meetings.

(v) As the situation eases, the two sides should expedite work to conclude new Confidence Building Measures to maintain and enhance peace and tranquillity in the border areas.

Accordingly, it is expected that the two sides will continue to have meetings of military and diplomatic officials to implement the agreements reached between the two Foreign Ministers and ensure full restoration of peace and tranquility in the border areas.
