The Galwan valley clash: another
perspective
Sagarika Dutt analyses the recent conflict on the China–India border.
On 15 June 2020 Indian
and Chinese troops clashed
in the Galwan valley along
the line of actual control
(LAC) in eastern Ladakh. It
claimed the lives of twenty
Indian army personnel, according to Indian government sources. A number of
Chinese soldiers were also
killed in this conflict. It was
the culmination of a border
stand-off that began in May.
This is not the first time that
there have been serious tensions in the border areas. The
last time there was a military standoff between the two armies was in 2017 in Doklam. But this time it was even more
serious and the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has
taken it to heart. He feels that it was a betrayal by the Chinese government after he had extended a hand of friendship
and goodwill to them and signed business deals with them.¹
It reminds one of how Jawaharlal Nehru felt when the 1962
war between India and China took place. In a televised message to the Indian nation, Modi said that the martyrdom
of the twenty soldiers will not be in vain and that India’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty is supreme. India will
do whatever it takes to defend the country and its borders.²
This article reflects on and analyses India’s response to the
border clash and the efforts that have been made by India
and China to de-escalate tensions in the border areas.
After India got its independence from British rule in
1947, India’s first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, was in
favour of maintaining good relations with China, although
he was fully aware of the border issue. In 1954 India and
China signed the ‘Agreement on Trade and Intercourse between India and China relating to Tibet’ incorporating the
Panchsheel principles that commit both countries to mutual non-aggression and peaceful co-existence.³ This led to
a cordial phase in Sino-Indian relations during which relaDr Sagarika Dutt is a senior lecturer in international relations at the
Nottingham Trent University, United Kingdom.
India has had a border dispute with China since 1947 when it emerged as an independent state,
and this has led to conflict between the two countries. On 15 June 2020 Indian and Chinese troops
clashed in the Galwan valley along the line of actual control in eastern Ladakh, which claimed the
lives of twenty Indian army personnel. Discussions have been held between the representatives of
the two governments, as well as the military commanders of the two armies, to resolve the crisis.
But they have ended in a stalemate. Meanwhile, India is strengthening its defence capabilities and
stepping up defence co-operation with the United States.
tions between the two countries were described as like those
between brothers or Hindi–Chini Bhai–Bhai. However, in
1962 there was a border war between the two countries that
India claims was started by China and for which India was
ill prepared. Since then India has viewed China with suspicion, and relations between the two countries have not been
good (notwithstanding the growing trade between them).
Thus, one of the main reasons for the conflict between the
two countries is the border dispute that they have not succeeded in resolving in over 60 years.
But apart from the historical territorial claims made by
China and also India, and from which they are not prepared
to back down as they believe that their territorial integrity
is at stake, the strategic importance of the disputed territory also needs to be considered as it has increased in recent
years. This is on account of China’s bases and highways in
the Aksai Chin area that India claims is illegally occupied by
the Chinese, as well as its Belt and Road Initiative of which
the China Pakistan Economic Corridor, which goes through
Ladakh, is an important part.4
 Not wanting to be outdone
by the Chinese, India has decided to ramp up its infrastructure in the border area, which includes building the roads
and bridges that are necessary to improve its military capabilities and logistics and strengthen its defence of its borderlands, but which the Chinese oppose as they believe that it
is leading to intrusion into what they claim is their side of
Narendra Modi
New Zealand International Review
7
the border. India has also
stepped up the patrolling
of its northern borders in
recent years, which brings
the two militaries into
close proximity to each
other and increases the
chances of skirmishes. But
Modi feels betrayed by the
Chinese because during
his visit to Wuhan in 2018
for informal talks with
President Xi Jinping, both
leaders had agreed to improve communication between their militaries to
maintain peace at the border, and this has clearly
not happened.5
Government responses
The Indian national security advisor, Ajit Doval, and the
Chinese foreign minister and state councillor, Wang Yi,
made a video call to each other in the weeks following the
15 June incident (on 5 July) and agreed that there will be
no unilateral change to the status quo in the border areas
between the two countries. The main points they agreed to
are as follows:
l Both sides should maintain peace and tranquillity in the
border areas and complete the on-going disengagement
process along the line of actual control expeditiously, as
well as a phased and step-wise de-escalation of the conflict. They will not take any unilateral action to alter the
status quo and will respect and observe the line of actual
control;
l The diplomatic and military officials of the two sides
should continue their discussions, including those under
the framework of the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on India–China border affairs.6
In addition, India has sought the restoration of the status
quo ante in key areas, including Pangong Tso, Galwan
valley and the strategic Depsang plains, apart from emphasising the need for thinning the military build-up in
the region. There have been several rounds of talks between top Chinese and Indian army commanders in the
Ladakh region since 15 June.
The agreement between the special representatives of the
two countries, Ajit Doval and Wang Yi, was followed by official statements from the two governments and their foreign
ministries. The Chinese statement emphasised that ‘The two
sides welcome the progress made in the recent military and
diplomatic meetings between the two countries, and agree
to continue the dialogue and consultation and emphasise
that the consensus reached at the level of the two border
defence forces’ commanders should be implemented as soon
as possible to complete the process of dis-engagement of
frontline forces of the two sides as soon as possible’. The
Indian statement also emphasised that both sides ‘should
complete the ongoing disengagement process along the LAC
expeditiously’ and also ‘ensure a phased and step-wise deescalation’ in the border areas.7
China’s views
Nevertheless, China does not see itself as an aggressor and
this is reflected in the views that Wang apparently shared
with Doval, and which are reproduced in the Chinese statement: ‘What happened recently in the western part of the
border between China and India in the Galwan valley is
very clear. China will effectively defend its territorial sovereignty and maintain peace and tranquillity in the border
area’. He also described the relationship between the two
sides as complex and added that both sides should work
to reverse this situation. According to him, China is in favour of constantly improving and strengthening confidencebuilding measures to avoid the recurrence of incidents affecting peace and tranquillity in the border areas.
China also wants bilateral relations between the two
countries to develop further and does not want differences
between them to become disputes. This is reflected in the
Chinese statement which says that ‘The two sides should
always adhere to the strategic judgement that they do
not pose a threat to each other and provide each other
opportunities for development, attach great importance
to the complex situation facing the current relationship
between the two countries, and work together to overcome
and reverse it as soon as possible’.8
But the Indians claim that after some initial progress, the
disengagement process has virtually come to a halt. While
China claims that disengagement has been completed at
most locations, New Delhi does not agree and has called
on Beijing to work sincerely for de-escalation and full
restoration of peace along the line of actual control.
India’s reaction
India has reacted quite sharply to its conflict with China
and is acutely aware that it is the weaker military power. A
decision was taken at a special meeting of the Defence AcJawaharlal Nehru
Wang Yi and Ajit Doval
Indian troops on the border with China
New Zealand International Review
8
quisition Council on 2 July 2020, headed by Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, to allow the Indian military to speed up
defence purchases to meet its critical operational requirements. According to the Defence Ministry, the special meeting had been convened ‘Considering the security environment due to the prevailing situation in the northern borders
and the need to strengthen the armed forces for the defence
of our borders’. On 2 July the Defence Acquisition Council
approved the purchase of fighter jets, missile systems and
weapons worth nearly US$6 billion.9

The purchases include 33 new fighter jets for the Indian
Air Force (IAF) that is apparently grappling with a shortage
of warplanes, and include 21 MiG-29s from Russia and
twelve new Sukhoi-30 fighters from Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited. In addition, the Indian government has invested in
Rafale fighter jets from France, five of which landed in the
Indian Air Force’s Ambala base on 29 July. According to the
defence minister, Rajnath Singh, the arrival of the aircraft
in India would give the IAF’s combat capability a ‘timely
boost’ and make it ‘much stronger to deter any threat’ that
may be posed to India.10
New capabilities
Rajnath tweeted that ‘I would like to add, if anyone should
be worried about, or critical about, this new capability of
the Indian Air Force, it should be those who want to threaten our territorial integrity’. The Rafale fighter jets are widely seen as a game changer for India’s strategic capabilities.
The Indians believe that they will significantly enhance the
offensive capabilities of the IAF with their advanced weaponry. The jet is apparently capable of carrying out a variety
of missions — ground and
sea attacks, air defence and
air superiority, reconnaissance and nuclear strike
deterrence. But it is worth
noting that the Chinese do
not agree with the views
expressed by the Indian
government and Indian Air
Force chiefs. According to
Zhang Xuefeng, who is
described by the Communist Party’s (propaganda)
website as a Chinese military expert, the Rafale jets
are only superior to the
IAF’s Sukhoi-30 MKI jets
but a generation below the
Chinese PLA’s J-20 fighter,
and cannot stand up to a
stealth warplane. However, former Air Chief Marshal B.S. Dhanoa argues
that the J-20 is not stealthy
enough to be called a fifthgeneration fighter.11
Meanwhile Prime Minister Narendra Modi has
invited global companies, especially US companies, to invest
in India’s defence, space and civil aviation sectors. In his keynote address to the virtual India Ideas Summit hosted by the
US–India Business Council on 22 July 2020, he said: ‘India
invites you to invest in defence and space. We are raising the
FDI cap for investment in the defence sector to 74 per cent.
India has established two defence corridors to encourage
production of defence equipment and platforms’.12
Relationship boost
The Galwan valley border incident has brought India and
the United States closer together and is described as ‘a
great opportunity’ for further strengthening US–India cooperation by Randy Schriver, former US assistant secretary
of defense for Indo-Pacific security affairs. He is reported
to have said that ‘our defence strategy is really getting a
boost from all this’.13 There is a lot of evidence to support
this. The nuclear-powered USS Nimitz, one of the largest
warships in the world, participated in maritime drills with
Indian warships near the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in
July 2020. Meanwhile, another super-carrier, USS Ronald
Reagan, carried out a similar exercise with the navies of
Australia and Japan in the vicinity of the South China Sea.
The two exercises make it evident that India will be the
United States’ principal ally in securing the Indian Ocean
region, while Japan and Australia will be key to protecting
the Pacific region.14
The four navies will be part of the expanded Malabar
naval exercise that will be led by India later this year, in
November. ‘This would be a QUAD exercise by default’,
according to a military commander who was referring to
the four-country quadrilateral security dialogue or QUAD.
A Sukhoi-30 fighter
Zhang Xuefeng
Birender Singh Dhanoa
Randall Shriver Mark Esper
New Zealand International Review
9
The United States is clearly
emerging as a bulwark against
China, especially in the Asia–
Pacific region. US Defense
Secretary Mark Esper stated
recently that ‘I want to highlight our increased defense
cooperation with India, one
of the all-important defense
relationships of the 21st century. We conducted our first
ever joint military exercise last
November, and as we speak
today the USS Nimitz is conducting combined exercises
with the Indian navy in the Indian Ocean, demonstrating
our shared commitment to stronger naval cooperation in
support of a free and open Indo-Pacific’.15 But at the same
time, the US government is closely monitoring what is happening along the line of actual control and, according to
Mark Esper, is pleased to see that both sides are trying to
de-escalate the situation.
No guarantee
India’s border dispute with China goes back decades and is
unlikely to be resolved anytime soon. As India’s defence minister, Rajnath Singh, said recently during a visit to Ladakh,
‘Talks are underway to resolve the border dispute but to
what extent it can be resolved I cannot guarantee’,16 adding
that India will not allow even an inch of its land to be taken
by any power in the world. Indian military commanders are
also aware of the complexities involved in negotiating with
the Chinese. Meanwhile, the Indian government has banned
Tiktok and many other Chinese mobile apps. This ban has
been noted in Western countries and may encourage other
countries to follow suit. India has the support of the United
States and US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has been
quite outspoken about it, describing India as ‘an important
partner and a key pillar of President Donald Trump’s foreign policy’.17 China, on the other hand, has warned India
not to form an alliance with the United States and pursue an
independent foreign policy.18
As some analysts have pointed out, China is at the centre
of several long running and emerging conflicts and this goes
well with its conception of itself as the middle kingdom,
a great power and civilisation surrounded by barbarians
and tributary states. But China does not have many friends,
especially in the Asia–Pacific region, and even Pakistan is
considered to be a client state. Nehru once said, ‘I have
always thought that it is important, even essential, that these
two countries of Asia, India and China, should have friendly
and, as far as possible, cooperative relations’.19 But he also
added that ‘Friendship cannot exist between the weak and
the strong, between a country that is trying to bully and the
other which agrees to be bullied. It is only when people are
more or less equal, and when they respect each other, that
they can be friends. That is true of nations also.’
Nehru was prepared to work for the friendship of India
and China but also made it clear that it did not mean that
‘we should hand over bits of Indian territory to China to
please them’. As far as the border conflict between India
and China is concerned, the talks between the military commanders in recent months have ended in a stalemate. As a
settlement is highly unlikely in the near future, the evidence
shows that better border management may be the only option for the two countries, which is what the Chinese and
the Indians are essentially engaged in.
NOTES
1. BBC, ‘India and China sign deals worth $22 billion as
Modi ends visit’, 16 May 2015.
2. ‘PM Modi’s address on the China issue’, available on
Youtube, 17 Jun 2020.
3. Alka Acharya, ‘China,’ in David M. Malone, R. Raja
Mohan and Srinath Raghavan (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy (New Delhi, 2015), p.358.
4. Jabin T. Jacob, ‘The China–Pakistan Economic Corridor
and the China–India–Pakistan Triangle’, in Jean-Marc
Blanchard (ed), China’s Maritime Silk Road Initiative
and South Asia (London, 2018).
5. CNBC, ‘China and India agree to maintain border peace
as Modi wraps up visit’, 28 Apr 2018.
6. Hindustan Times (New Delhi), 6 Jul 2020, ‘No unilateral
change to status quo agree India-China: 10 points’.
7. Ibid., 6 Jul 2020, ‘NSA Ajit Doval talks to China’s Wang
Yi, troops pulled back along LAC: Read full statement
here’.
8. Ibid., ‘India–China ties in complex situation, says Beijing
after Doval–Wang icebreaker’.
9. Economic Times, 2 Jul 2020, ‘Government approves
purchases of fighter jets, missile systems, weapons worth
Rs. 38,900 crore’; Hindustan Times, 15 Jul 2020, ‘Amid
border row, India allows military to speed up weapon
purchases worth Rs. 300 crores’.
10. Hindustan Times, 29 Jul 2020, ‘Moments after Rafale
fighter jets land, Rajnath Singh’s veiled warning to
China’.
11. Ibid., 31 Jul 2020, ‘Rafale vs J20: Ex-IAF chief Dhanoa
calls China’s bluff with two simple questions’.
12. Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, 22 Jul
2020, ‘PM’s address at India Ideas summit 2020’.
13. Economic Times, 15 Jul 2020, ‘Xi Jinping’s show of
force against India is a strategic gift for President Donald
Trump’.
14. Hindustan Times, 22 Jul 2020, ‘Twin naval exercises
with US supercarriers signal QUAD has arrived’.
15. Jim Garamone, US Department of Defense, 21 Jul 2020,
‘Esper discusses importance of Indo-Pacific strategy’. The
reference to defence co-operation with India was made
in his virtual speech to the International Institute for
Strategic Studies (IISS).
16. Hindustan Times, 17 Jul 2020, ‘Talks on to solve border
dispute, can’t guarantee anything: Rajnath Singh’.
17. Business Today, 23 Jul 2020, ‘India a rising defence, security partner of US: Mike Pompeo’. Pompeo made this
statement in his virtual keynote address to the annual India Ideas Summit of the US India Business Council on 22
July 2020.
18. Hindustan Times, 22 Jul 2020, ‘Hope India continues to
follow an independent foreign policy: China’.
19. Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s Foreign Policy, Selected
Speeches, September 1946–April 1961 (New Delhi,
1961), p.344.
Rajnath Singh
Copyright of New Zealand International Review is the property of New Zealand Institute of
International Affairs and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted
to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may
print, download, or email articles for individual use.